---
description: >-
  We do however need to rethink our understanding of life. – Tim Ingold, The
  Perception of the Environment
layout:
  title:
    visible: true
  description:
    visible: false
  tableOfContents:
    visible: true
  outline:
    visible: true
  pagination:
    visible: true
---

# Prologue: Hanging this Book's Theoretical Framework

Herein the opening section of this book we introduce, in no particular order, some _primary zones of interest_ with which the text concerns itself. For themselves, they appear diffusely throughout the following pages, from the first to the last; in their various contexts and framings they become thematic and theoretical fixtures, that, when arranged and presented in what we hope is a consistent mode of coherence, form a clear articulation of a larger philosophical picture.&#x20;

## The Larger Philosophical Picture&#x20;

Framed as it is _a reflective observation_, this book takes as its focus _the unfolding evolution of_ '_agency'._ As such, its methodology, much akin to a cartographer's, is one of _tracing,_ _following this line_ (or _lines_) of inquiry, from its origins through the present day and beyond (in this respect, it takes an impossibly longview in terms of temporal relevance, as will be shown). Of course, at a certain point in the cartographic process, the blip of _humanity_ appears; and it is from here that arises, quite organically, one of the overarching tenets of this book's argument: that, along the long, long evolutionary line that _defines_ agency_—_literally, technically—the _incidence_ _of humanity_, our blip—in the respect of our continuation, our perpetuation of the evolution of agency—is, in fact, _meaningful_. Put another way, insofar as our ascendence to existence _has moved_ and continues to _moves_ agency, humankind plays very much a material role in this four billion year old thread of evolution. What's more, our species appears best fit to play the _lead_ role in materializing the next evolutionary leap; that is, we might be just that emergence which delivers to the cosmos some new evolutionary iteration of _agency_.&#x20;

What's the catch? Simply that we have to continue to survive (i.e. not go extinct) and accelerate evolve ourselves, a task that may be easier said than done. This book, by  delivers the actionable thought system by which this evolution might unfold in a way that is most favorable for all living things. This is the thought system that forms the basis of ACEL. &#x20;

### What is ACEL?

This is for the book in its fullness to answer. Suffice it to say here that ACEL—still very much youthful philosophe at the time of writing these words—stands to become itself a cultural catalytic whose philosophical system, by the efforts poured into this work, breathes its first life in structural form. &#x20;

### What is '_Humanity_'? 'Extension'?

As noted above, _humanity_—whether that normative, biologically-substantive aggregate of _homo sapien sapiens_; a potent, _affective_, form-variant theoretical assemblage that is able to change and be changed in order to meet new existential needs; or, perhaps, some amalgamation of both—that, along with its _evolutionary sustain_: these be the worthy captors of _Accelerate or Die's_ foremost philosophical foci, given their import within the cosmic emergence of agency. But, as just shown, _humanity_, as a concept,&#x20;

encourages that we make efforts at the outset to _get very clear_ on, not what these terms mean fundamentally (we know from Derrida that "No engineer can make the "means"–the sign–and the "end"–meaning–become self identical" (Derrida, _Grammatology_ xix)), but we might asymptotically interpret the meaning that ACEL holds for them. While we know of course that,. we may not be able to But this only  matters none if the reader has, perhaps quite literally, "lost the plot". This is to say that For,  really only holds any meaning, though, when a given reader understands the content and is able to follow along with relative ease, perhaps at some point even reflecting and applying these concepts in new spaces.  With this,  The imperative here is born of the fact that, as concepts go, _humanity_ and _evolution_ live.

Challenging those narrow frames, By this, the reader will remain clear and consistently apprehensible of in each individual deployment of the term. To be sure, this expository need for a theoretical breakdown of _humanity_ wouldn't be necessary were it not for the complex holism with which ACEL——endows it. Fortunately, we will not need to build this model of humanity from scratch; we can and will deploy incisive theoretical precedents as laid out by great thinkers, and synthesize them into a functionally smooth model by which ACEL's humanity receives philosophical support.&#x20;

### '_Becoming-Carpenter_': The Process of Building ACEL's Theoretical Framing

As deviating as ACEL's _humanity_ is from the term's more traditional containments—we speak of those normative, narrow frames that are ever-sedimenting further into our sociocultural bedrock, becoming more imperceptible and powerful all the time. our memetic repository—ACEL, in its novelty, is largely left to its own devices, as there is for it no ready-made model should ACEL ever hope to become an _affective tour de force philosophique_, it has the absolute need from the very start to _seek out a suitable theoretical precedent_ off of which to base its foundational ideas. Then, it might begin the process of '_becoming-carpenter'_; that is, once ACEL's basic framing is logically connected and it maintains a tensile strength capable of holding weight, we can being to build upon the frame (Deleuze and Guattari, _Plateaus_ 232-309). While there will be much more required of this young system, solidity and support for itself in .  we must build this: a '_humanity, as given by ACEL'_ its own theoretical housing—one viable, pliable, and cogent.&#x20;

### What is '_Extension_'?

_Humanity_, for ACEL, stands—with purposed reason—a conceptually imaginative distance from its common, standardized biological rendering, axiomatic as it is to the modern 'bodily gaze'. This is not to say that ACEL stands in opposition to scientific views of the body, or science, generally—quite the opposite: it is only thanks to scientific progress, particularly those advancements made in the biological sciences over the last two centuries, that ACEL's root philosophical interest, that of the _evolution of humanity_, may be carried to its full extension.

And extend it does: ACEL's theoretical _humanity_, contra to traditional models of our species' conceptual aggregate, where we most often endow it with  where lengthens both into the unfathomably distant _not-yet_, where the _homo sapien sapien_ —should it somehow still exist, will be, quite literally, unrecognizable; as well as all the way to _even prior_ to the first instantiations of biological life on Earth. Such is the _temporal relevance_ contained within ACEL's _humanity_; but, how can this be? How is it possible that any model of _humanity_ is able to contain—not just on one side of our existential coin but on both sides—durations, incomprehensible durations that have extended, and will extend, their _beingness_ to far greater values than the relative of our species' own existential history? In this way, it might even be said that ACEL is _supra-biological_ in its scope, insofar as it takes longview&#x20;

ideas at all not as some quantifiable _something_ that exists in the world, but as the complex in relation it. As will be shown, ACEL aligns this gaze purposefully, for reasons directly pertinent to its overall purpose. Should this step be foregone, the reader should have no grounding or confidence that their interpretation of the words to follow are, in fact, the delivery intended. Such is the purpose of this prologue.&#x20;

As ACEL values both empirical and philosophical approaches to understanding human life, we break ground in this process with a brief survey of the historical landscape of human perception studies, and then move into the broader concerns proferred by phenomenology. &#x20;

## ACEL's Noble Purpose&#x20;

This book takes as its purpose the vigilant ensuring that, ever-remaining upright, stand our two existential pillars: its short-term survival and its long-term evolution—and the success of the second is logically dependent on the first. The fact is that the entire thought system undergirding this text materialized only out of a recognition that this _first_ pillar faces imminent threat—not by persons, peoples, hegemonies, but by a merit of force, such with respect to ours, we have not yet experienced ratio. For this reason, the following pages will set forth an intrepid and courageous schema for the survival and evolution of the human species. A comprehensive, thorough, and detailed proposition, it is obviously framed as necessity (or something very close to it): the miles-from-anywhere unprecedented existential leap that we are recommending for humankind.&#x20;

That it does find itself so singular in case, ACEL cannot guarantee with certainty the success of this plan, for what will be suggested has never been attempted, and probably never suggested. Nevertheless, we intend not only that our efforts herein beget success (by survival and continued proliferation), but also that they might open a groundwork for accelerating discussions in earnest around the tough topic of a very real and very looming existential threat _without_ _frightened recourse to a flight-to-policy_. Additionally, we hope our arguments are cogent, strong, and affective enough to the initiate some semblance of development, at scale, for such an undertaking as ours—at the very least, something akin to what is proposed.&#x20;

### Connecting ACEL Thought with  '_Relationality_'

#### _Content_ & _Context;_

For British anthropologist Gregory Bateson, brought on as it was by Descartes, catalyzes a suicide of meaning: In borrowing the concepts of _content_ and _context_ from structural linguistics to draw out his theory on human-environment relations, he writes, "the word only exists as such—only has “meaning”—in the larger context of the utterance, which again has meaning only in a relationship” (Bateson, _Steps_ 410). With this, Bateson is suggesting that _meaning_ (i.e. content), does not, in fact, have meaning—is not _itself_—until it comes into _relation_ with the _context_ in which it is placed. Being, without being _in relation to_ a world, is an utterly meaningless abstraction for Bateson. His student, Tim Ingold, confirms this:

> In Bateson's account... information only exists thanks to the movement of the perceiver relative to his or her surroundings. Bateson constantly emphasised that stable features of the world remain imperceptible unless we move in relation to them... Through this \[eye] scanning movement we _draw_ distinctions, in the sense not of representing them graphically, but of ‘pulling them out’... the world opens out to the mind through a process of revelation. (Ingold, _Perception_ 18)

Similarly, Ingold views, "Organic life... \[as] active rather than reactive, the creative unfolding of an entire field of relations within which beings emerge and take on the particular forms they do, each in relation to the others." His theory of an "‘ecology of life'... \[accounts for] the whole-organism-in-its-environment. In other words, ‘organism plus environment’ should denote not a compound of two things, but one indivisible totality. That totality is, in effect, a developmental system" (Ingold, _Perception_ 19). This theoretical suture recasts the mind, which was altogether abstracted by Descartes, back into its original _livingness_:

> We do not... have to think of mind or consciousness as a layer of being over and above that of the life of organisms, in order to account for their creative involvement in the world. Rather, what we may call mind is the cutting edge of the life process itself, the ever-moving front of what Alfred North Whitehead (1929: 314) called a ‘creative advance into novelty'. (Ingold, _Perception_ 19)

Thus, for both Bateson and Ingold, the mind—its cognition and perceptions—is not, must not be displaced from its environment, defined by a delimiting border against it; for it is the relation to which that brings it to life, to meaning. Nor can the environment be closed off or abstracted away from the mind, lest emergence die and all becomes imperceptible. How closely this relationality recalls Maurice Merleau-Ponty's sentiments in _Phenomenology of Perception_:

> One must therefore reject as an abstraction any analysis of bodily space which takes account only of figures and points, since these can neither be conceived nor be without horizons... I am not in space and time, nor do I conceive space and time; I belong to them, my body combines with them and includes them... To be a body, is to be tied to a certain world, as we have seen; our body is not primarily in space: it is of it... We shall need to reawaken our experience of the world as it appears to us in so far as we are in the world through our body, and in so far as we perceive the world with our body. But by thus remaking contact with the body and with the world, we shall also rediscover ourself, since, perceiving as we do with our body, the body is a natural self and, as it were, the subject of perception. (Merleau-Ponty 115-16, 162, 170, 239)

#### What Does a Relational Globe Look Like?

While the holistic tone of this phenomenological model, with its dissolutions of dichotomies and commensurable vision, arrives wholesome, positive, even tensile, the truth is that this theoretical framework—as it accounts for every molecular mobilization in every moment of a given material plane—is, without exaggeration, nauseating in scale when we contemplate the proliferant nature immanent to its design. It is here that the famously labyrinthine Gilles Deleuze and Felix Guattari—whose synergistic, vibrating world will make many appearances in the pages to follow (and justice will still not be done to it)—bring the full raw scope of what a relational world looks like under the lens:&#x20;

> "... \[elements] are distinguished solely by movement and rest, slowness and speed. They are not atoms, in other words, finite elements still endowed with form. Nor are they indefinitely divisible. They are infinitely small, ultimate parts of an actual infinity, laid out on the same plane of consistency or composition. They are not defined by their number since they always come in infinities. However, depending on their degree of speed or the relation of movement and rest into which they enter, they belong to a given Individual, which may itself be part of another Individual governed by another, more complex, relation, and so on to infinity. There are thus smaller and larger infinities, not by virtue of their number, but by virtue of the composition of the relation into which their parts enter. Thus each individual is an infinite multiplicity, and the whole of Nature is a multiplicity of perfectly individuated multiplicities. The plane of consistency of Nature is like an immense Abstract Machine, abstract yet real and individual; its pieces are the various assemblages and individuals, each of which groups together an infinity of particles entering into an infinity of more or less interconnected relations. (Deleuze and Guattari, _Plateaus_ 254)&#x20;

This rhizomatic, sourceless fountainhead of relations is no doubt stimulating to theorize upon from a distance (_Plateaus_ 30); it is quite another to try and evince empirically, as mapping even five seconds of the phenomenological relations between, say, a running body (itself an assemblage of an infinite amount of multiplicities) and a trail (infinite more assemblages) would take years, lifetimes. But what is important here is not the impossibility of mapping the emergent relations in this phenomenon, but that it is indeed a _mapping_, an "affair of cartography", by which these relations can be understood or envisioned:

> Individual or group, we are traversed by lines, meridians, geodesics, tropics, and zones marching to different beats and differing in nature. We said that we are composed of lines... Or rather, of bundles of lines, for each kind is multiple... it should be borne in mind that these lines mean nothing. They compose us, as they compose our map. They transform themselves and may even cross over into one another. (_Plateaus_ 202-03)

Surely, this runner and the trail experienced through their five sense perceptions intimidate into aversion any containment-by-mapping. Just _one_ sense, should it somehow be parseable, would be a matter of bewilderingly frenetic lines gushing forth in infinite perpetual emergence; to and from no permanent destination (lines cannot be said to be definitively unidirectional, bidirectional, or multidirectional, or any combination of the three); each vibrating in varying magnitudes (perhaps every so often our runner hears from the trail cars passing by on a nearby road); simultaneously striking subadditive and superadditive quantities in their traversing one another; and constantly shifting relational touchpoints across the topographical landscape (which is, in fact, itself). Lines of affect everywhere forever always. And that is just _one_ sense. We have five, and they are all interconnected. Unfathomable are the permutations.&#x20;

Such are things when viewed relationally: infinitely complex integrations of multiplicities of assemblages (i.e. bundles of multiplicities of lines). And yet, our human experience of the world is not just frenetic and constant chaos; we are able to perceive and experience, to move through the phenomenal world, in more or less a state of equilibrium, or harmonious flow. Again Merleau-Ponty's sentiments ring resonant:

> I do not bring together one by one the parts of my body; this translation and this unification are performed once and for all within me: they are my body, itself... perception is always a reading off from the same sensory data, but constantly accelerated, and operating with ever more attenuated signals... our body is not an object for an ‘I think’, it is a grouping of lived-through meanings which moves towards its equilibrium. Sometimes a new cluster of meanings is formed; our former movements are integrated into a fresh motor entity, the first visual data into a fresh sensory entity, our natural powers suddenly come together in a richer meaning... (Merleau-Ponty 173, 176, 177)

Thus, while Deleuze and Guattari's philosophy (of which we've only scratched the surface) provides us a comprehensive view of the _relation machine_ that powers what we might call _the entire everything_, we are able to deploy their picture through the phenomenologically-focused insights of Merleau-Ponty, Bateson, and Ingold, and thereby bring a more precise awareness to _humanity_.

### The Connection Between _Relations_ and Agency&#x20;

In light of Deleuze and Guattari's philosophical world, the complexity of the human body—the perception-mega-aggregator that it is—becomes more fully appreciated; truly, its baseline functioning is no less than performance art par excellence (_sans_ _effort_, no less). And yet, its marvel in this respect is so often passed over with attenuated descriptions akin to their being deterministic state machines, basic 1:1 computational designs—"I am hungry, so I eat". This is a highly misleading dilution of our body's potency, removed as it is from its true relational power; indeed, these inaccurate, impotent models of the body form the foundation of so many hegemonic and decelerating systems. We need to adopt at scale a more accurate model of embodiment.&#x20;

It is just here that a relational view of humanity, of the phenomenal world generally, injects its promise: this framework, when _lived_, allows for, encourages even, the training, the directional manipulation of these lines. That is to say, rather than move through life passively (and ignorantly) receiving and being affected by these phenomenal lines, when one embodies a relational habitus, insofar as it means living with an awareness of these lines, he or she may take hold of them, to directly engage with and maneuver life through them. In other words, a relational framework of the body reintroduces (from wherever it was last lost) _agency_ into our habitus. It opens out an existence where clear structural pathways present opportunities by which to activate agency.&#x20;

By this framework, we arrive to the following: an agent embodied in relational dynamism with the material, spatial environment with which it shares emergent manifestation; a dance shared across affective lines of perception that, in its unfolding, generates information and meaning, which is itself fed back into the web of relations to accelerate the unfolding emergences on their way.

### Preparing Ourselves the Existential Leap for a True Relational Mode &#x20;

In many ways, the description above of the affective _body-environment relation machine_ is already how we intuitively understand the phenomenal world: at baseline, perception cannot take place without 1) some assemblage of a perceiving body: an apparatus with a processing system are requisite for the processing of 2) some assemblage or assemblages of stimuli: that which is perceived. In other words, to even meet the bare minimum qualifications of the possibility of perception, one must appreciate _as_ _necessary_ both the _content_—the body—and the _context_—its environment—of perceptual experience.

With that said, it is the theoretical leap, from holding content and context _as_ _necessary_ (only), to their sharing an _ontological_ _equality_—that is, they in and of themselves are evidently regarded as being _of equal value_—that will situate this book where it needs to go theoretically (we might recall Ingold here, that life "is not a compound of two things, but an indivisible totality”) (_Perception_ 19).&#x20;

Thus lays out ACEL's theoretical framework: one that, as will be shown, will open, rather than close; contain, rather than control. This model will offer an actionable ground from which ACEL's goals for humanity may lift off; a baseline from which this movement may accelerate our potential with deliberate and directed agency.
