# The Four Corners of Mutability

## ACEL's Noble Purpose&#x20;

This book takes as its purpose the vigilant ensuring that, ever-remaining upright, stand our two existential pillars: its short-term survival and its long-term evolution—and the success of the second is logically dependent on the first. The fact is that the entire thought system undergirding this text materialized only out of a recognition that this _first_ pillar faces imminent threat—not by persons, peoples, hegemonies, but by a merit of force, such with respect to ours, we have not yet experienced ratio. For this reason, the following pages will set forth an intrepid and courageous schema for the survival and evolution of the human species. A comprehensive, thorough, and detailed proposition, it is obviously framed as necessity (or something very close to it): the miles-from-anywhere unprecedented existential leap that we are recommending for humankind.&#x20;

That it does find itself so singular in case, ACEL cannot guarantee with certainty the success of this plan, for what will be suggested has never been attempted, and probably never suggested. Nevertheless, we intend not only that our efforts herein beget success (by survival and continued proliferation), but also that they might open a groundwork for accelerating discussions in earnest around the tough topic of a very real and very looming existential threat _without_ _frightened recourse to a flight-to-policy_. Additionally, we hope our arguments are cogent, strong, and affective enough to the initiate some semblance of development, at scale, for such an undertaking as ours—at the very least, something akin to what is proposed. &#x20;

## An _Inner-World_ Methodology&#x20;

Below are laid out the four methodological _corners_ of our framework: these to which our species, for the sake of our collective interest in remaining so (that is, a species), ought to attend insofar as they encourage an optimal positioning _within oneself_ by which a given human might extend themselves longest while simultaneously extending the collective species. That is to say, that within these _corners_ are lodged theoretical virtue systems by which humans may arrange and align their inner worlds; these systems have taken into account all probable occurrences between the _unfolding-now_ and an equanimous settling in some successful _not-yet_. Note here that, while much actionable counsel awaits in the chapters-proper, ACEL's baseline methodology advances not much anymore than a simple attendance to the resonant clarity of one's heart; a genuine care _to-become-with-integrity_. We contend that by this measure alone, the rest will follow.

And follow the rest must, for a different world from the familiar is coming—and we must be prepared as we move inevitably closer to the Phantom's "point of no return", where there exists no recourse left other than to execute the existential jump. How? _Become-ethics. Become-virtue-repository_; the resulting concordant, coordinate, _collective effervescence_—akin to those cooperative prebiotic cells, those evolutionary cheats who skirted the Darwinian code of competition in natural selection, only to join forces and create all life as we know it—will arrive us to not only each necessary step with eyes open and full attention, it will also arrive us to another generation of human beings.

Each _corner_, of which there are four, begins with an subjective imperative. Each is followed by a list of attendant virtue-predicates. These are each given brief explanations as to their utility, their functionality in the _yet-to-come_.&#x20;

There is no force; there is no judgment: These are yours to take or leave. All that might be said is that, should one arrive to humanity's Big Change, in a mode inattentive or neglecting of these recommendations, much as they are each skill-based praxes that open new mental frameworks for new realities, we wish your stuck mode luck.  &#x20;

## The Four Corners

<table data-card-size="large" data-view="cards" data-full-width="true"><thead><tr><th></th><th></th><th></th><th></th><th></th><th></th><th></th><th></th></tr></thead><tbody><tr><td><h2><em>Ontology Must</em></h2></td><td><h3>1. Be Mutable</h3></td><td><p><em>What does it mean to embody a mutable ontology? What does a pliable relationship with one's core being look like?</em></p><p></p><p>First, it would be helpful here to brush up on the ontology: </p><p></p><p>A <em>mutable</em> <em>ontology</em> for any individual means that they are able to—they have been uprooted from their strata, destratified, decoded, deterritorialized, destabilize, deterritorialize, reassess, rearrange, and redeploy -- however often is necessary -- the core nature of their being, their existence. Any set of assumptions or driving ideas they have of their existence, what makes them "them", is malleable and remains open to change. This is being light-footed regarding your what your <em>self</em> is, as this may be required to change in order to survive.</p><p></p><p>A caveat here is that, for some untrained individuals, this skill may risk their sanity, their ability to stay grounded in any existence whatsoever. Any given human, should they be required to mutate their ontological situation in order to survive, must learn ways to, during periods of the fluctuating self, stay grounded and centered in the <em>relationality</em> of the world.</p></td><td><h3>2. Be Relational</h3></td><td><h4>Guiding Question: What does it mean to embody a relational ontology? What does a relational existence between body and the space it shares look like? </h4><p>Recall Bateson's theoretical applications of content and context: If ontology is the <em>content</em>, then relationality is the <em>context</em>. Because ontology, that of being, cannot, <em>in any way</em>, be approached in isolation <em>from a relationship</em> to the space shared with the being -- Yuasa Yasuo has said, “…a human being cannot exist as a life in the cosmos unless he or she coexists with other life," -- it then follows that the most consistent and stable piece of any existence is, not existence, but the immediate lines of relation that existence has with the phenomenal space it occupies (Kasulis, Ames, and Dissanayake 1993: 348). This also recalls Dan Dennett's quip of the ant climbing up the grass stalk where it can more easily get into a sheep's stomach and reproduce: "The benefit is not to the reproductive prospects of the ant but the reproductive prospects of the fluke," where the fluke is the ant walking up the grass stalk for apparently no reason it has decided on itself (Dennett). In other words, rather than the meaningful connection of the ant to its lifeworld lie somewhere between it and the destination the ant is going (i.e. the environment), it is the ant's connection to the memetic line of relation <em>itself</em> --i.e. the <em>fluke,</em> the <em>meme itself</em> -- that matters, that brings value, to one of the two in relation.  Dennett takes this even further by saying the ant isn't the protagonist in this story if we measure that by value accrual; it is the <em>meme</em> who is the protagonist, who gains the most benefit from all of this. </p><p>Note that the space is also in constant flux; we see this by looking with our eyes for only just a moment. The maintaining of sanity during ontological shifts thus stems from grounding oneself in the consistent-in-changing memetic lines of relationality between yourself and the space that space shares with you.</p></td><td><p>Hegel: Phenomenology of Spirit (1807)</p><ul><li>ontology mutate thru conflict + resolution</li></ul><p>Bergson: Creative Evolution (1907)</p><ul><li>"becoming", adaptation</li></ul></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td><h2><em>Agency</em> <em>Must</em></h2></td><td><h3>1. Find (a) Faith (in data)</h3></td><td><p>Guiding Questions: Is it not the absolute baseline nature of the  agent to, in fact, deploy agency? If this were not the case, wouldn't it be more likely that this person—defined as they are by some certain other quality—would be termed by that attribute, instead? To beat a dead horse: Isn't a deployment of agency, in and of itself, an action—a choice that ripples, that affects, in some way, the actor's surrounding environment? By each and every act of the individual agent, as well as for the collective concept, aren't things in some way changed, altered, mutated? </p><p></p><p>It would seem so: for, agents, by nature, <em>do</em>; they <em>act</em> and by this, they <em>affect;</em> and by this, they <em>alter</em>: they manipulate and mutate their lived surroundings through deployments of will, or agency.  They produce evolutions that dislocate elements from their beginning states (sure, some agent might deploy themselves to "make sure nothing happens" to some object; although latent, there is still a <em>will</em> deployed here that <em>alters</em> what could have happened had the object not been looked after). </p><p></p><p>Truly, were it the case that agents did <em>not affect change</em>; that through some impossibly sterile assemblage no lines were ever transformed (meaning they would not cross, either); in other words, were they to generally deploy zero agency over their surroundings, over their life—then what would it be that would constitute an agent, anyway? What would have to be deployed to elicit <em>affect</em>?  </p><p></p><p>These rhetorical head-scratchers, perhaps more annoying than thought-provoking, were not actually rattled off out of a direct interest in answering them. Rather, it was the format, the rapid-fire barrage of inquiries—some of which were purposefully theoretically tenuous—that was shelled out so as to potentially well up in you, reader, from your latent intensities, some semblance of <em>affective</em> <em>doubt</em>. There is a reason for this.</p><p></p><p>Generally speaking, <em>doubt</em> (of some kind) is the appropriate affective response to those passages; which type of doubt matters. Seeing as, sprinkled between some coherent inquiries were laid circular reasonings, more or less abysmal applications of Deleuze, a misuse of terms, the reader should have been given pause and begun to have misgivings regarding the credibility of the author. Doubt in us: </p><p></p><p>But what did Zarathustra once say unto thee? That the poets </p><p>lie too much? But Zarathustra also is a poet.</p><p>Believest thou that he there spake the truth? Why dost thou believe it?" </p><p>The disciple answered: "I believe in Zarathustra." But Zarathustra shook his head and smiled.—</p><p>Belief doth not sanctify me, said he, least of all the belief in myself. </p><p>But granting that some one did say in all seriousness that the poets lie too much: he was right we do lie too much...</p><p>Thus Spake Zarathustra. (Nietzsche, <em>Zarathustra</em>, 138-39,41). </p><p></p><p>Yes, we have played Zarathustra: truly, the doubt ought to have laid square with <em>author-agent</em> (and his awareness of what is possible to get away with. While a high five is due here to the brow-raised skeptics, it is primarily another band whom we must assume exists: the Blind Faith listeners, who moved through those passages above keeping the faith all the while that the authors were simply carrying out with steady hand of integrity (because, why not?) a new line of questioning. But that deliberate handwashing of clarity they errantly placed upon  themselves as a doubt-in-understanding; and so walked into the trapped door laid bare. It is <em>this</em> group who opens us out to the present need to tease out types of <em>faith</em>. Why? </p><p></p><p>By this little trick, we might have revealed to some readers a new bit of self-knowledge: that there exists in them a latent, yet clearly operational <em>faith</em> in authorial integrity. Certainly, this is generally held to be the standard, more, a positive and appropriate view of writers. Without any doubt, ACEL, in its humanity-focused purpose, will <em>never</em> advocate for a "trust no one" approach to living. Our aims here remain a distant elsewhere.</p><p></p><p>Our primary interest here is a crossing of two lines: a <em>Becoming-Confident</em>, a <em>Becoming-Precision.</em> And, insofar as our second virtue-system, <em>agency</em>, requires within its core infrastructure an independently-functional, efficient, and verifiable mode of efficacy, such is our interest in discerning the optimal mode of faith by which to build and verify our agency. </p><p></p><p>Once we've successfully found (or created) and imbedded within our framework an optimal mode of <em>faith</em>, our individual agency (which supports the collective) will exponentially increase its power and reach. This is because faith, as it is deployed <em>prior</em> to every <em>choice</em> on the part of the agent (aside from <em>consideration</em>, the first "button" pressed) acts much like an accountant, insofar as it approves or denies deployment of its own self to an agent's consideration.  </p><p></p><p>To be sure, this is <strong>not</strong> a religious faith, but some other kind—one that primarily engages data. Should that encourage action of the agent, this faith imbues effusive feelings of confidence (i.e. Becoming-Confidence) and comfort, which themselves arrive out of precision in data processing (i.e. Becoming-Precision). In sum, faith will suggest a judgment call based on its findings, and then assist and help the individual initiate and execute  higher probable outcome favorable to your ends—all through the deploying an affective agency toward a goal.       </p></td><td><h3>2. Live its Teleology</h3></td><td><p>It should be noted here that it is not sound practice to <em>overemphasize</em> the role that agents play in a given durational alterity, either. It would be absolutely erroneous to say  that a given environment <em>cannot</em> change, cannot <em>become-deterritorialized</em> until an agent becomes present to facilitate this unfolding by the supreme power of . Mises says similarly, "Both primitive man and the infant, in a naive anthropomorphic attitude, consider it quite plausible that every change and event is the outcome of the action of a being acting in the same way as they themselves do" (Human Action 23). This is simply not true; a tree can fall quite well on its own in the woods without a woodchopper there to help in along.  </p><p></p><p>With that said, a cultural system Teleology, by definition, is the understanding of any particular phenomena primarily by the purpose it serves, e.g. the teleology of a knife is to cuts things." For Accelerationism, the teleology of agency is to asymptotically maximize agency to the nth degree and complete the evolution of humanity. All accelerant agency is aimed teleologically towards towards this goal. Such is the <em>purpose of agency.</em> </p></td><td>Self-Produce</td><td></td><td><p></p><p> Human Action (1949)</p><ul><li>teleology behind self-directed action</li></ul><p>Hegel: Phenomenology of Spirit (1807)</p><ul><li>if reinterpreted, agency within the dialectic *tension*</li></ul></td></tr></tbody></table>



<table data-card-size="large" data-view="cards" data-full-width="true"><thead><tr><th align="center"></th><th></th><th></th><th></th><th></th><th></th></tr></thead><tbody><tr><td align="center"><h2><em>Faith</em> <em>Must</em></h2></td><td><h3>A. Be Total</h3></td><td><p> </p><p>Insofar as efforts are effective: Mutability requires an undivided, total faith that one's efforts to transmute their content are or will be effective; in other words, that they will achieve their aim. This is a secular faith. Should faith fall short, there will be no "ontological jump", which preexists any "existential jump". Like Kierkegaard, Ontological mutability truly does require a leap of faith.</p></td><td><h3>2. Have Point of Origin</h3></td><td>A worthy departure: An individual must have a worthy reason to deliberately choose to deploy their agency towards initiating an alteration, mutation; to actionize an evolution of their corporeal, ontological relationship with the world. The individual must be have faith that what they are moving towards is preferable to what they are leaving behind. The point of origin provides the purpose of faith, what spurs one to <em>move</em>.</td><td><p>Hegel: Phenomenology of Spirit (1807)</p><ul><li>faith in synthesis</li></ul><p>Mises: Human Action (1949)</p><ul><li>purposeful, faith in doing something will beget intended goal</li></ul></td></tr><tr><td align="center"><h2><em>Phenomenology</em> <em>Must</em></h2></td><td><h3>A. Be Reconfigured: Lifeworld = Organism + Lines  </h3></td><td><p>Traditionally, the lifeworld is theoretically composed of the interplay between organism and environment. This is wrong, and will have devastating consequences if not rearranged for the upcoming "existential jump". Remember, for Bateson, the nature of  the "context" (e.g. sentence) is to stabilize and spatially open meaning for the "content" (e.g. word) -- the context determines the content. And while our content to this point has existed sufficiently within an environmental context, we are changing; and so our context must change as well.</p><p> </p></td><td><p>That was as individuals are now become <em>mutable content</em> -- that is, we require our content to be alterable by nature --  we now require a context that is minimally determinant of our content. For, while the environment may have once been appropriate for our context, this is no longer the case -- our increase in mutability is an increase in agency, and in the former phenomenological setup we would remain too static, too <em>unmutable</em>. </p><p>Our lifeworld of course remains a shared exchange; but, this is now an exchange between, not organism and environment, but organism and <em>relationality</em> itself -- we and the lines of relation connecting us to the space we fill.</p></td><td>Being, without being <em>in relation to</em> a world, is an utterly meaningless abstraction: it does not, <em>cannot</em> exist as itself until it comes into <em>the lines of relation</em> with a world. Organizing one's ontology around the lines of relation encourages a more malleable relationship between the two. And thus it is that the new human will find its grounding in the fluctuations of the universe; much as the Energy Machine one day will.</td><td><p></p><p>Husserl: The Crisis of European Sciences and Transcendental Phenomenology (1936)</p><ul><li>if reinterpreted from individual to relation *tension*</li></ul><p>Merleau-Ponty: Phenomenology of Perception (1945)</p><ul><li>embodied perception eveolves to incorporate relations</li></ul></td></tr></tbody></table>
