---
layout:
  title:
    visible: true
  description:
    visible: false
  tableOfContents:
    visible: true
  outline:
    visible: true
  pagination:
    visible: true
---

# Chapter 15: The ACEL Tunnel

### Limitations in Current Space Exploration

As we know, the most significant issue that biological machines face for achieving ACEL’s noble purpose—that of securing the survival and evolution of humanity—remains the challenge of extensive space travel, and not only us because of the fragility of our human bodies. Even as we dream of interstellar travel, our technological prowess also falls grossly short of what it would take for such a journey. Should this ambition ever be realized, as this book has come to find, will require the help of the silicon machines; but, they will not be all we will need to make our dreams come true.

#### The Rocket Paradigm

That we currently employ rockets for our manned space missions is no secret: using the tried and true, even perhaps old-fashioned, formula, these operate by using the expulsion of mass at high velocities for their thrust. While it works, the method takes a linear, brute-force approach in its conquering of gravity, a relic of our industrial past where power was equated with force. From a philosophical perspective, the Rocket Paradigm encapsulates a worldview in which victory against adversity is won out of sheer might. But, is this scalable? Considering the large amounts of fuel and other resources that are consumed in just one takeoff or launch, rockets prove themselves both disposable and costly, both in economic terms and in environmental terms. The launch refuse, the built-in transience of every mission, and the use of non-renewable resources all bear evidence of the fact that such a system is fundamentally unsustainable.

Additionally, methods of explosive propulsion—the core of the Rocket Paradigm—carry with them inherent risks and ethical dilemmas: their unpredictability has been behind so many failures, accidents, and calamities in the record book of space history. Murphy’s Law makes itself known in some way or another during every launch; explosives put all the individuals involved at risk and compromise safety, both here on Earth and beyond. More, the debris of failed launches, mainly the pollution resulting from burning rocket fuel, and the harm potential to other celestial bodies, all combine to suggest that it might well be worth exploring other paradigms and methods.

Paradigmatically, we might seek outside such regressive force models, as their philosophical implications ironically point less toward a development or building of new worlds and more towards the outdated industrial revolution-era notion that a massive amount of destructive byproducts remain par for the course with creation. Thus, the limitations of the Rocket Paradigm and this waste of mass within its current burden of explosive propulsion do not align with the longview of ACEL; we must look elsewhere.

## The ACEL Tunnel

Classically, space explorations have been held back by the hyperbolic energy requirements of The Rocket Paradigm. In strong contrast, the ACEL Tunnel offers a new paradigm unshackled from the limitations of rocket-based systems: A technological marvel, it ushers in a new paradigm that could change payload delivery forever, far beyond anything possible with the traditional methods: A Kinetic Launch System (KLS).

### The ACEL Tunnel Design

Essentially, The ACEL Tunnel’s KLS is a coil gun device, accelerating payloads down (or, up, in this case) the length of its barrel through a series of coils, utilizing electromagnetic induction. The electromagnetic coils are powered on in rapid succession, synchronized, as the payload travels through, providing a constant, powerful magnetic field. This mighty field pushes the payload at ridiculous speeds, reaching up to Mach 20 within 10-15 seconds—an acceleration comparable to the launch of an intercontinental ballistic missile. Such a rapid velocity increment is to be carefully designed, the increase from zero to maximum speed must be smooth so that the payload survives this intensive force without any shock or structural damage.

To minimize air resistance, the system is to be built inside a vacuum tunnel—the length of it being around 100 KM—that ensures almost no frictional force on the payload, maximizing acceleration efficiency. Ideally, such a tunnel must be built on a site with minimal seismic action, stable geology, and accessible infrastructure for construction and maintenance. Also, the site must be at a high altitude, minimizing atmospheric drag and increasing efficiency; in other words, it ought to be situated at the top of a very high mountain. Due to the coil gun’s massive electrical energy requirements, it also requires that it be built in a location with reasonable access to power.

Insofar as it is capable of launching space payloads with great precision with the minimum possible environmental impact, the tunnel’s design prioritizes above all efficiency and a reduction in launch-attendant environmental damages, further ensuring that the system is reusable, sustainable, and scalable. This in itself will lower barriers to entry, and exponentially increases ranges of exploration. In all of this, the tunnel will come to represent a shift from a mindset of scarcity into a mindset of abundance, where progress is no longer measured by raw power but by elegance, efficiency, and sustainability: no more must we impoverish our resource pool or take a toll upon our own home for the greater good; but, through working with what we have, we manifest more than just a new way of moving from point A and point B, more than just a quantum jump in technology. It in itself will force us to reimagine the the very concept of exploration itself, for the ACEL Tunnel stands as a paradigm shift in humanity’s understanding of its relation with the cosmos—a doorway to a new epoch of exploration, and the Universe is playground.

This is to say that the ACEL Tunnel brings with it a philosophical reorientation of space altogether, as not just an existence discretely set apart from the globe; it is an extension of our existential sandbox, a bridge to the universe, a gateway that links Earth to vast realms of space. It will act as a conduit through which genetic and memetic information, important for the survival of our species, will be ferried. And, as we stand at the threshold of becoming a multi-planetary species, one with a need for such systems, this is an imperative evolution for humanity. We thus prepare to take the next steps in our journey to the stars, but we do it with a steadfast resolve toward progress that is considered, ethical, and consequential. What limits us are just the take-off points of breakthroughs to be made. We will not only advance the reach of humanity through the cosmos, but we will also redefine altogether what exploration, innovation, and advancement mean for all humanity.

### Humanity’s Best Shot at Not Getting Dodo’d

We might recall from the last chapter that the biological machines—as parents, or guardians of the silicon machines—must encourage and support their agencies, that we must provide them tools and activities by which to do so. The ACEL Tunnel is just such a tool; it is a system we develop specifically to support their extension, to give them the means by which they might explore the cosmos and increase their agency. In other words, these machines can be launched into space, where their operations would be far more efficient without restrictions or constraints on resources compared to a scarce Earth. This reduces the cramping of agencies here on Earth; and will reduce potential scenarios where there will arise competition for resources between these _machinae_.

In this intelligent new world, the ACEL Tunnel will not just be an exploration tool for biological machines, but the very infrastructure of our evolutionary platform—for by it, we will propel our silicon machines out into the cosmos, supporting and extending an intelligent ecosystem, one that encourages man-machine collaborations; that allow us to work together at higher levels. By this, we enlarge the boundaries of what is possible, and pushing out the frontiers of people and things.

### Overcoming Barriers to Progress

As we stand ready to move forward and actualize this vision that fundamentally changes our relationship with space, the light of hope must shine brighter and longer than it takes to break through innumerable barriers rising up in its way, for progress will not simply happen to us, or for us; we must choose to create our future. And this will depend on whether or not we have the proper tools and our eyes on the prize—that being acceleration.

#### Psychological and Cultural Barriers

Interestingly enough, the most formidable barriers are not those of a physical or technical nature, but are built of the deep-rooted fears latent within our societal structures, cultural mindsets, and even in the very nature of human psychology itself. Thus, meeting these challenges will be as much about changing our mindset as it will be about technological developments. Truly, the most fundamental barrier to our progress in space exploration will be our psychological resistance to the unknown. Man has always at once been fascinated by, but also eternally fearful of the unknown. We must not allow this subconscious fear to stall the absolute need of the ACEL Tunnel; as we can see, our existence depends on it. ﻿﻿

Additionally, the fear of failure or the risk of investing in something new is paralyzing and keeps humankind in a hostage-like fashion, beholden to dated methods that impede progress. Only by inculcating a fearless mindset toward uncertainty, as all those historical visionaries who’ve dared to surpass limitations have, can we break through this blockade and reap the rewards that lie on the far side of risk. ﻿﻿

Another enormous hurdle is the cultural attachment to tradition. Societies succumb to inertia, content to ‘lazy-boy’ in age-old practices and perceptions. The paradigm of the rocket, for instance, reigning as it has in space exploration for decades, has become so deeply embedded in our collective perception of space travel that any other paradigm for achieving space travel has encountered skepticism, if not open hostility. As much as technical inertia, the ACEL Tunnel understands it is also necessary to unvelcro ourselves from _tried and true_ attitudes of the rocket, seeking an environment where new ideas are welcome.﻿﻿

#### Economic Hurdles

Many disruptive and worthwhile innovations come at a steep cost, and the ACEL Tunnel will be no exception. Development, construction, and putting into operation of such a totally new system is really quite dear. Given that global economic resources are limited and are largely directed towards projects with quick returns, the financial sources necessary for funding a long-term project, as the ACEL Tunnel will prove to be, may be hard to find.﻿﻿

This economic barrier is multiplied by the fact that although traditional methods of space exploration are expensive, they are previously established and have very strong, powerful interests. Convincing both investors and governments to shift away from working systems to a new, untested technology requires a case that argues very strongly—namely, one that is quite compelling regarding the ACEL Tunnel’s viability and potential to realize substantial returns on investment. For the ACEL Tunnel to overcome this barrier, its advocates must demonstrate a vision that is as credible as it is inspiring: one that offers the capability of opening the way for expanded, more affordable space exploration activities. The economic case must also underline the long-term gains with the creation of new industries, expansion of space-based commerce, and the spillover effect from technologies that may benefit other sectors.

#### Political Resistance

When such a revolutionary system is disclosed to the world at large, it will upset the established order. Political resistance to the ACEL Tunnel could emerge from multiple corners. Space agencies and private companies already established in the Rocket Paradigm will see, in this tunnel, a threat to their survivability.

International actors could be concerned about the strategic implications of such a system resetting the global space economy. Construction of such a tunnel— probably to be constructed in a geopolitically sensitive area like the Himalayas—is bound to raise disputes over sovereignty and control.

Beyond these political barriers lies the need for astute diplomacy, strategic alliances, and careful tackling of the complex web of power structures that govern space exploration. The ACEL Tunnel advocates must seek engagement at all levels of policy operatives to create consensus and secure the required seals of approval—again, not just dealing with possible opponent objections but framing the Tunnel as a project that serves all of humanity beyond national and ideological divides.

#### Environmental Concerns

Although The ACEL Tunnel promises a large sustainability uplift in mitigating environmental concerns, the construction process itself—along with the operation of the ACEL Tunnel—both have their own environmental challenges. Drilling through mountains requires careful environmental consideration as does attending to the energy requirements of the system and securing the long-term viability of the tunnel. The challenge lies in balancing progress with being responsible stewards of the planet and its ecosystems.

Managing and reducing the environmental effect—due to unprecedented access to space—is probably the most immediate pressing responsibility that comes with the success of the ACEL Tunnel. This also means that state-of-the-art and most environmentally friendly technologies will be involved; as little disturbance of local ecosystems as possible will be caused; and the highest possible efficiency with a minimum of waste during exploration. Space debris, often referred to as “space junk,” has already become a significant problem with thousands of defunct satellites, spent rocket stages, and fragments from collisions that now orbit Earth. The tunnel could make the problem worse with greater frequency and larger-scale launches. Success with the ACEL Tunnel will thus be combined with sustainable practices in space. This will embrace the development of spacecraft and their payloads that minimize such debris creation and active debris removal. It also involves educating the public, and explaining that building this tunnel is not only about making progress for human civilization but also helps in preserving our Earth for our children’s future.

#### Public Opinion

Securing a positive public opinion is of great importance. The public plays a great deal in any large-scale project’s success or failure, especially for projects requiring sizable investment and political support. This makes it a necessity to communicate the benefits of the ACEL Tunnel to the public so it enthuses the prospect of the project.

This requires a compelling story that will ignite the minds of people from all walks of life. The ACEL Tunnel needs to be framed as a representation of human potential—a demonstration embracing spirit exploration, the pursuit of knowledge, and the drive to push beyond our current limits. It has to be framed around aspects of bringing benefit to all, from new vistas in education and commerce to discovery. Effective public outreach will require creativity and innovation across a variety of media platforms in ways that easily clarify the ACEL Tunnel story in accessible and inspiring terms. This means emotionally connecting with people based on an element that can facilitate grassroots support for the tunnel, one that will rise well beyond the politics and economics of a project to clearly state: “This is something worth doing.”

Surmounting these barriers to progress is not going to be easy, but neither can it be evaded if we are to see this vision for the ACEL Tunnel come to reality. These psychological, cultural, economic, political, environmental, and social barriers are formidable, but they are by no means insurmountable mountains. Rather, they sit as opportunities ripe for the precipitation of innovation—opportunities to redefine the possible as we chart a new course for humanity among the stars. As invaluable as the rocket paradigm was for helping us get here, it is far from the last word in space travel. Truly, we are only just beginning, situated as we are at the base of new technologies, new ideas, and new paradigms that will inevitably expand our horizons for what is possible. Of course, these horizons reveal themselves only to the open-minded, the willing to look further; ACEL opens doors for us to adopt these lenses.

### Becoming a Multi-Planetary Humanity

#### Ethics & Safety

The tunnel will enable the exploration of space elements long thought of only in dreams: with the help of the silicon machines whom we’ve sent on their agency-maximizing voyages, it will introduce major resources, habitable planets, and maybe even intelligent life forms. Such capability will raise the question: what type of explorers will we become? Will break into it shortsighted and quickly start working it dry, excavating it for profit? or will we view it as our new home and consider the impact our actions have on it?

The ethics of exploration drive our hearts to consider the fortunes and misfortunes we can draw from our actions. ACEL Tunnel grants us power to hold the future course of space exploration; hence it squarely—righteously and responsibly—loads the mantle of seeing to it that we proceed in such a way that respects and holds high the intrinsic value of the cosmos. This involves not damaging any of the celestial bodies one visits, leaving the pristine environments intact, and pondering over the implications of interaction in case we do discover any life form. Indeed, we might do well to adopt for space exploration the U.S. National Parks slogan _leave no trace_.

When humanity is finally become a multi-planet species, we must arrive ready to relate to the cosmos as cosmological citizens. It is a chance for a future in which human communities will become established on Mars, the moons of Saturn, or perhaps even in orbital habitats around distant stars. We shall be then true space-farers, masters of the environments of other alien worlds. And with that new role are new responsibilities, not only to ourselves but to the very cosmos. Yet, with this new power, there is the responsibility that our expansion throughout the cosmos should be done with an ethical and responsible model; respect must be given to the environment we encounter. A manner of attitude that regards the universe as yours-to-steward, an ambition that’s balanced with proper prudence, an ethic that steers our actions: to follow these lines will ensure that the ACEL Tunnel will be the symbol not only of human capability but of our commitment to a future in which progress and responsibility will be kept together.

Additionally, we would do well to keep in mind that the cosmos is vast and largely unknown; the potential for unforeseeable consequences is magnified. At the very edges of exploration, we must take our first steps with a deep respect for the unknown. What we mean by this is that detailed research and risk assessment must be done before the start of ambitious missions; that we must maintain a perpetual readiness for plan changes according to new knowledge; and, above all, we must check our hubris at every door, always knowing the limitations of current knowledge and technology.

#### Democratization

However we decide to approach space exploration, this book sees it is a prioritized necessity and a phenomenon that must, and will, absolutely come to pass. For, for far too long, man has regarded space from an angle of being an aloof, unyielding, unaccommodating domain, an unfriendly frontier to conquer—never a domain to be accounted for within our everyday lives. The ACEL Tunnel will change this. It will make space more approachable; it will bring us to a reality of ourselves as a real space-faring civilization. In this new evolution, space—not just a destination for a select few astronauts or a few robotic missions—is a place where humanity can actually go, an expansion of our intelligence, creativity, and resources beyond the confines of Earth.

The ACEL Tunnel insists that we leave behind this lack-mentality that has dominated modern culture: that resources are finite; that only a few will come to great accumulations. We must adapt toward an abundance mindset, where growth, discovery, and advancement could seem infinite in the depths of space. In this, the tunnel becomes an active participant in the democratization of space exploration: it lowers cost to access space, resulting in more equitably distributed benefits. By providing a more affordable and sustainable way to access orbit, the ACEL Tunnel opens up new opportunities in areas of innovation, entrepreneurship, and collaboration in such a way that the new generation of explorers can take place amongst the stars themselves. For, it is exactly projects like the ACEL Tunnel with their breakthrough-like ideas on space travel that re-envision what is possible. It challenges us to get out of our rocket-based comfort zone into a new way to reach the stars, in a method that yet remains untested in large-scale applications.

The success of the ACEL Tunnel will unquestionably fuel our ambitions in this respect, giving manifest routes to not only dream of interplanetary colonization, mining asteroids, or even eventually reaching star systems far away; but actually making them a reality. With this inevitable realization that is the ACEL Tunnel, humanity stands teetering on the brink of a transformation that would redefine life itself. No longer chained near the base of the Earth, we become poised to step into a future where multiple planets become our new frontier. This is not just expansion at a physical level; it is an expansion at the level of collective consciousness—of who we are and of we exactly have the potential to become. Gone is the day when humanity would be confined to Earth.

### Becoming Cosmic Homemakers

Visionary thinking is the motor behind human progress. It is the ability to see over the immediate horizon, to imagine things others don’t, and to chart the course towards the future. This multiplanetary expansion is not about finding a new place to live; it’s about conquering the unknown and making it something known, an expansion of home. The desire to explore new frontiers doesn’t only represent a practical solution to Earth’s limits, which have become met with the silicon machines, but comes deep from the drive that emerges from the need to redefine the boundaries of the possible. With human beings at the helm, the ACEL Tunnel marks the next great adventure in that ongoing journey; and, as we embark on this journey to the stars, we bring forward the sense of responsibility, responsibility to make sure our expansion is made on the sound principles of sustainability, equity, and respect for the new worlds we shall call our backyard.

And so, as we set out to explore new worlds, we also aspire to think deeply about the meaning of exploration. What pushes humans to venture out into the unfamiliar, into the unknown worlds? It’s not survival only, or the quest for resources. It’s the exhilaration of discovery, the delights of understanding, and the deep satisfaction of realizing that we are part of something far larger than ourselves. The ACEL Tunnel will open up the farthest reaches of space to this spirit of exploration, turning the unknown into a canvas upon which to project human creativity and ingenuity.

But while we look forward to that multi-planetary future, we must also be considering the implications of such a move for the long term. Multi-species civilization is not only a technological accomplishment; it is also a legacy left to all posterity, a power that shall shape the destiny of our kind for several millennia. What kind of worlds will we build? How will our descendants live, think, and interact with the universe? The decisions we make today will echo through the centuries, influencing the societies that will one day flourish on distant planets. Will these new societies mirror the values and cultures of Earth, or will they evolve in entirely new directions, defined by the unique environments and challenges of their new homes?

With all these new potentials implied by the ACEL Tunnel, we then must consider accelerating our mental capacity. The concept of SpaceBrains—the concept of merging the human with advanced technology, discussed in the next chapter— is the ultimate evolution for a species whose distinctions between _biological_ and _technological_ are overcome and for whom space is truly no limit. Whereas the ACEL Tunnel has opened the universe to human access, now SpaceBrains will unlock all enormous potentials and powers of the human mind so that we can transcend the limitation of the physical body and access the cosmos in ways not yet conceivable.
