---
layout:
  title:
    visible: true
  description:
    visible: false
  tableOfContents:
    visible: true
  outline:
    visible: true
  pagination:
    visible: true
---

# Introduction

## ACEL Foundations

This book intends to deliver in full scope the methodological and philosophical foundations of an emergent thought system, one that is both compelling in its reflections and imaginative in its propositions. We call this system ACEL. While novel in just about all of its postulations and orientations, ACEL does in part owe its manifest form to one such prior philosophical system, that of the admittedly problematic Accelerationism. As such, before we dive into the expansive, holistic, humanity-forward world of ACEL, in the name of historical context must this introduction pin up the theoretical backdrop from which it ascended to its own, full-on, agented existence.&#x20;

### The Thorny Origin of Accelerationism

Attempts to encompass within definition a cohesive view of Accelerationism—that tempestuous character of philosophy from which the methodical and holistic system of ACEL derives its name—presents with the immediate challenge of _containment_: the motley denominations and ideologies deployed out from under this umbrella have, much in the spirit of the name, accelerated in number over the past two decades. Despite having only been neologized in 2010 (Noys), the term has become a catchall signifier of swarms of ideological forks that, in terms of human decency, live on both sides of the fence. Its positive outgrowths and core values encourage its consideration as a philosophy, a thought system, an inspired cultural movement. Simultaneously, it has earned, with fair justification, designations such "cult" (MacColl); "fringe philosophy" (Beckett); "far-left group" (Gardiner); "far-right group" (Hughes and Miller-Idriss); even "terrorist organization", thanks to the actions of certain pockets of extremists who claim its name (Parker). With such variegated materializations, not only is it challenging to pin down a coherent and concise understanding of Accelerationism-_proper_, it is potentially risky to associate with the term at all.

So, why did ACEL? What is that piece—that theoretical gem that lies within Accelerationism—that makes it worth familiarity with such other groups and ideologies? What is the thread that weaves through itself and so bears its resemblance? To be sure, it is _not_ the advocacy of violence, nor the exclusionary mechanisms attendant with so much within Accelerationism; ACEL leaves these far behind. Truly, if there do be a gem in the original framework, it is that, at its most basic methodological level, Accelerationism champions one thing in particular: this is a vehement and normative focus on "maximizing output". In other words, the system of Accelerationism advocates an action-oriented ethos toward the production of _output_, or _results_. While the original philosophy held defined vision of those 'results'—that is, the toppling of capitalism by means of accelerating technology—its rhetoric at some point became open-ended; and this seems to be the fountainhead of Accelerationism forks: adding to Accelerationism's mission statement the theoretical addendum, "_whatever those 'results' may be",_ opens a door for virtually any initiative to justify their proprietary brand of output in the name of an established philosophical system.&#x20;

Such is why Accelerationism finds its application in so many various settings, both positive and negative. And, as negative externalities go—what we might call the "bad apples" theorem—regardless of the benign outputs of some groups who have adopted the basic framework of Accelerationism, the more violent, uninformed fringe sects who have wreaked havoc in its name have brought the general movement into conflict with presiding hegemonic structures. It is for this reason that Accelerationism, in _all_ of its iterations, has been pinned as "insurgent", "violent", and "divisive" (Parker).&#x20;

### AI & the Rise of Accelerant Forks

And yet, despite this, interest in its 'maximum output' ethos has boomed in recent years. Indeed, while trying to kettle Accelerationism into a cohesive framework may prove a challenge, less so is locating the root catalyst of its rise in popularity: this is none other than the sudden, ubiquitous accessibility of AI technology; and with it, the existential paranoia with which it now seems to haunt modern society.

Just within the last few years, our consumer markets have been flooded with an unprecedented volume of usable technological innovations. With the debut of ChatGPT in November 2022, the once-esoteric, almost mystical technology known as artificial intelligence availed its utility, at no cost, to virtually everyone in the world, ushering in a new paradigm of ubiquity in consumer-technology (Roose; Nielsen). Yet our collective response to this new world was not of joy, but of existential dread that AI might one day kill us all. And, rather than handle this fear with poise, we rushed to courtrooms, to government hearings (West; "Hearing Wrap Up"; "Mace Announces"), and spiraled in speculation on the potential dangers and threats of this new AI technology—threats not just to our societal infrastructure and modern systems, but to our very _existence_.&#x20;

As it so often happens, the flight-to-doom catalyzed a flight-to-policy—this one so elephantine it earned the moniker, "AI Safetyism" (Brodsky). In the name of caution and human safety, AI Safetyism pushed an agenda—one backed by a majority of Big Tech's most influential figures—to centralize and bureaucratize progress within the AI technological industry (McMillan). The niche, Silicon Valley-tied social movement, "Effective Altruism" (EA), served as perhaps AI Safetyism's most formidable and successful set of advocates, painted non-critically as they were in public image campaigns. They became an "ethical elite", marketed to the general public as billionaire-saviors (McGoey); even non-target demographics, heretofore uninterested in legislative policy, took up EA's pro-government leanings: their advocacy for UBI and globalization, even their proposed forced redistribution of wealth (Berlatsky).

And yet, as quickly as Effective Altruism did become a public hero did it fall from grace, by two events. The first was the November 2023 scandal at OpenAI where CEO Sam Altman was unexpectedly ousted from his role by an alleged EA-majority board (Tarantola). As his removal meant greater freedom for EA in building AI regulatory frameworks, the media storm framed Atlman's removal as a politically-motivated "infiltration" and "takedown" coordinated by Effective Altruism (Broughel). The second was the fall from grace of Sam Bankman-Fried (SBF), founder and former CEO of derivatives crypto exchange FTX (Reiff). Undoubtedly once the highest profile adherent of Effective Altruism, SBF was, in no hyperbolic sense, regarded as a prophet, a modern day savior (Lang). Then, he was caught defrauding $8b from his own customers and he now sits the next 25 years in prison (Godoy et al.).&#x20;

Taken together, these two events effected such public disillusionment with the advocates and ideals Effective Altruism that—as Newton's Third Law of Motion goes—the pendulum of opinions and initiatives began to swing back in the other direction, and reactionary opinions on AI regulation abounded. For example, Elon Musk, who, for a brief time took the stance of an AI Safety "Doomer" (Musk), turned about-face and made his AI software, Grok, open source (i.e. the code was made public) (Knight). This move was championed by pro-AI, anti-EA groups.

### e/acc: Forking a Fork&#x20;

One such group is e/acc, or "Effective Accelerationism", a parodically named and self-proclaimed "anti-EA" movement. Above all, e/acc champions the _acceleration_ of AI development; that is, maximization of its output. According to its founder, (formerly-anonymous) _X_ user @BasedBeffJezos, i.e. theoretical physicist Guillaume Verdon (Fridman), e/acc is a self-proclaimed "virus" intended to _entropically_ undo that which was levied by Effective Altruism. Said another way, e/acc effectively wants to neutralize the effects Effective Altruism has had on the world; such is source for its chosen accelerant focus on unregulated AI development. With that said, this movement also interests itself in space exploration, pro-population and pro-economic policies—all of these together form its overall mission or purpose: to maximize the amount of energy humans can harness. This theoretical goal, based as it is in thermodynamics, is to increase entropy at all cost (Fridman).&#x20;

With a thematic focus on output maximization, e/acc is "Accelerationism-as-fork" bar none, and it quickly caught the attention of this book's creator. However, it came to be seen that there exist innate limiting factors to its reach: as it is born from a reactionary framework (a 1:1 model against Effective Altruism), its scope of meaning within its existentially-formed binary remains within the realm of "this, not that". That is to say, its existence is dependent to an entity outside of itself, leaving unscalable much of its potential promise. It also necessarily leads to a divisive disposition, which, in the affective tones with which e/acc presents, the less-than-welcoming cultural norm is palpable: e/acc as an abstract mode seems to carry itself with indignation, with an off-putting and exclusionary spirit of aggression and technocapitalism. In earnest it is said that perhaps e/acc's self-identification as a "virus" might have more affective truth to it than the metaphor implies, just as podcaster Lex Fridman noted to Verdon during the latter's interview, that most human beings reject and avoid viruses _(_Fridman).&#x20;

With that said, e/acc's advocacy for the open transference of information and their opposition to variant-suppressants, insofar as it encourages forks of itself on the principle that it is extending the evolution of thought, is certainly a thought-provoking and positive feature of itself.

### Enter ACEL

It is also precisely what ACEL has done, the result of which is what is found in the following pages. To be sure, many aspects of e/acc's model will be found therein: energy as core unit; the core beliefs of the free market; detailed interstellar plans. With these, ACEL soberly ties itself to e/acc. With that said, one, if familiar with e/acc, might notice a more relational and inclusive framing of the world, as well as more human-focused program with more life-empowering outputs. With these evolutions, ACEL upon arrival presents with a more welcoming and more palatable nature than any "technocapitalism-or-bust" disposition might. While indebted for the framework, ACEL here distances itself from e/acc's aggressive ethos, as well as from all the violent stains found in the history of Accelerationism and the inane trains of thought which catalyzed them. By this, ACEL opens out for itself clear roads on which to accomplish its self-directed goals.&#x20;

## ACEL Priorities & Values

What are the priorities and values of ACEL, exactly? While it is for the core chapters of the book to build their full scope over time, it would be just as well to touch on a few of the broader themes, theoretical priorities, and overall purpose with which ACEL concerns itself. In so doing, it is hoped that the reader might gain a kaleidoscopic entry point into what this book will, in fact, talk about. For the thematic elements introduced below, their substantive reach as theoretical fixtures throughout the book should no doubt become obvious from the start; they undergird most, if not all of the various discourses to follow. Of these, they are deployed from a range of contexts, disciplines, and histories; it is hoped that for each treatment, its arrangement is orderly; its depth, incisive; its delivery, compelling. And, while each discrete revelation gleaned we see as holding significance in and of itself, it is in their larger synthesis, and the whole of the philosophical system shown clearly, that the book will check mark its success. Above all, we aim to have sustained a consistent enough mode of coherence that it will be with articulate clarity and affective texture this text's expansive philosophical picture materializes.&#x20;

### ACEL's Noble Purpose &#x20;

This book intends to introduce and deliver to the public a comprehensive treatise on the  methodological and philosophical thought system that is ACEL. Within the very the core of this system  resides its _**sole purpose**_, its _raison d'être, which is_ _**to ensure and secure the continued survival and evolution of our holistic humanity**_. Indeed, success of this perpetual goal is the vigilant ensuring that, ever-remaining upright, stand our two existential pillars: its short-term survival and its long-term evolution—naturally, the success of the second is logically dependent on the first.&#x20;

### ACEL's Methodology

The methods by which ACEL has chosen to fulfill this purpose—that is, how it will most effectively "ensure and secure..."—can be seen in its retainment of legacy Accelerationism's core methodology: output maximization. While keeping this framework as its organizational driver, its compass, ACEL chooses for itself its own object of interest; or better, its own output of interest: this is '_agency'_, or _the unfolding evolution of_ '_agency_' (agency being one's capacity to act). Why agency is ACEL's output of choice will become clear in this book's core chapters.&#x20;

With such an overall purpose, one that that deploys for its means agency maximization, any methodology chosen naturally ought to be a methodology that answers, "_How_ (do we maximize the output of agency)?"; to put another way, its methods should follow the directive: maximize agency. And while the full answer to "How?_"_ is, again, a job for the core chapters, we might point towards one more object of interest, that of _intelligence_; for, intelligence is taken to be the medium through which agency increases; more precisely, through its own maximization does agency grow; even more precisely, through its acceleration. This leads to a logical flow: _t_he acceleration of intelligence maximizes the output of agency, which ensures our survival and evolution. Shown diagrammatically:

**Intelligence (Acceleration) -> Agency (Maximization) -> Survival (Evolution)**

This is the ACEL way; its methodology. Thus, on top of the philosophical insights to be posited by ACEL, it, too, brings a prescriptive, actionable layer by which those offerings may be lived. It does not tease with the vision of a world filled with agency, only to bugger off; it brings with it a manual for navigating said world, a manual designed by virtue of what is most favorable to the survival and continued evolution for all agented life (for the philosophy students, this added step brings ACEL into the framework of normative ethics, much as it is resembles an act utilitarian system). Indeed, in its encouraging the acceleration of intelligence and the maximization of agency to ensure a safe and secure pathway for humanity and its evolution_,_ these two acts become moral or ethical acts. And surely, it will be suggested that we ought to do them—how this is suggested will be shown soon enough.

### ACEL's Philosophical Frame&#x20;

Insofar as this book is framed as a reflective observation, one whose 'observer' is _tracing_, or _following_ a line (or lines) of inquiry through discrete ideas—this work might do well to adopt the illustrative metaphor as the the revelations of a cartographer—an _activation_ cartographer; a mapper of _agency._ This line, or these lines, or threads, or bundles of thread, he traces from the origins of life (or perhaps before) through the present day and far beyond. Of course, at a certain point in this cartographic process, our blip of humanity emerges into this cartographer's trace. It is from here that arises one of the overarching tenets of this book's argument: that, along the long, long evolutionary line defining agency (literally, technically _defines_), the _incidence of humanity_ (our blip), is, in fact, _meaningful_. Put another way, insofar as humanity's ascendence-to-existence has effected and continues to effect agency, _humankind plays a substantive, material role in the agency-thread of evolution_. A third way: when it comes to agency, we are important. What's more, our species' emergence appears timely, and the one best suited to lead agency into some next evolutionary, existential leap; that is to say, we might be just that entity which delivers to the cosmos a new iteration, a new emergent agency. As will be brought to light, it is either this, or we die. Said better: Accelerate or Die. Obviously, ACEL will choose the first option; and this choice brings humanity, a necessary piece in the perpetuation agency, to the fore of some cosmic importance.

Thus it is that humanity—whether that normative, biologically-substantive aggregate of _Homo sapiens_; a potent, affective, form-variant theoretical assemblage that is able to change and be changed in order to meet new existential needs; or, perhaps, some amalgamation of both—that, along with its _evolutionary sustain_: these be the two worthy captors of _Accelerate or Die's_ foremost philosophical foci, given their import in facilitating the cosmic emergence of agency. Truly, it goes without saying that there is an all-importance of humanity's own "_evolutionary sustain_" to this story; for, logically, our existence is just as tantamount as any which might be effected by our hand: We cannot facilitate the evolution of anything else if we are, in fact, non-existent. It is therefore imperative that we continue to survive (i.e. not go extinct) and that we continue to evolve our own selves; only by this does it seem that agency might continue unfolding into the future.&#x20;

### Dangers & Threats

It is true that these tasks are easier said than done, especially in light of certain existential challenges we may soon face—threats that loom within the intensities of our _yet-to-come_. Truly, the entire ground of this philosophy materialized out of a recognition that its first pillar faces imminent threat—not by persons, peoples, hegemonies, but by a merit of force, such that with respect to ours, we have not yet experienced ratio. Thankfully, _Accelerate or Die_ delivers solutions in this regard, as well as one or two intrepid and courageous schema that may be our best hope of enduring what is to come. Both comprehensive, thorough, well-researched propositions, their deployment, given the circumstances, is unsurprisingly framed as necessary (or something very close to it); for it is none other than the next  miles-from-anywhere unprecedented existential leap.&#x20;

What will be suggested has never been attempted, and probably never suggested. Nevertheless, the latter chapters of this book deliver, in full, a hypothetic model for what might be considered humanity's next and necessary step to our continuing survival and evolution. This thought exercise, open as ACEL is to there being alternative suggestions, might do well to be regarded above all as a starting point for earnest discussion to be had on a very real and very looming existential threat, but one that we may have without frightened recourse to _a_ flight-to-policy. Additionally, should these efforts prove sound and affective enough, it might initiate more concrete discussions, on some semblance of development, at scale, for such an undertaking as ours—at the very least, something akin to what is proposed. Until and through and beyond these moments of intensity, which will be met with courage, ACEL intends to accelerate and maximize humanity's agency to endure through them, and prosper after them. It is just this particular thing through which it sees it most effectively extending the existence and evolution of humanity. &#x20;

## ACEL Influences

### Three Modes of Influence, by Example

Many of the ideas that compose the theoretical basis of ACEL are explicitly inspired by great thinkers of our past. Many of ACEL's guiding assumptions as well, when teased apart, reveal themselves as concordant manifestations of past philosophers or scientists' theoretical interventions. Still others will prove to be applicable when overlayed by the postulations delivered in this book. Of these inspirations and applications, there are too many to go into detail here. With that said, it will help to introduce a few  of the different methods by which ACEL engages with the genius of the past, and their intellectual contributions that still reside within humanity's historical repository. We'll do so using three examples: 'The Dialectic' of 18th century German Idealism philosopher G.W.F. Hegel; free-market capitalism as put forth by 20th century Austrian economist Ludwig von Mises; and the concept of 'memes', introduced by 20th century evolutionary biologist Richard Dawkins. Without falling into exhaustive expositions of these world-changing ideas, explaining their relation to ACEL's philosophical program will help to explain our meaning when we speak of inspiration or application. &#x20;

### _Progress_ and Hegel's Dialectic

At the very root of ACEL do the concepts of 'history' and 'progress' sit. So, too, did they for George Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel, one of the most important thinkers of the last millennium, whose contributions to humanity's philosophical repository cannot be ignored. And yet, as the ACEL theoretical world began to take form, as it stretched out its plane of time, established how objects and events moved across this plane, over it, Hegel's insights were not involved. Even 'History' according to Legacy Accelerationism was considered more in terms of the way it viewed progress. Thus, while the same cannot be said for its interpretations of biology, or economies, for instance, ACEL's approach to its historical framing, the formula it created around how objects and ideas moved across the plane of space and time, was effectively based in first principles.&#x20;

And yet, it arrived to the following frame of the evolution of history, understood as _progress_, which:&#x20;

1. almost, if not always, inevitably conflicts with existing structures;
2. abides by a standard order of process; and,
3. is above all, absolutely necessary.&#x20;

Although massively incomplete by comparison (to the point of threadbare), ACEL's notion of the history of progress unintentionally plots a few points on Hegel's Dialectic map. While praiseworthy in and of itself, it does, potentially create a major tension for ACEL (or it would, if it cared). This is because legacy Accelerationism and all of its forks, by principle, vehemently disavow Hegelian structures—even if their grievances are entirely semantic in nature. While this could give rise to opponents for ACEL, so be it. The ACEL view of history and progress is Hegelian. Get over it.&#x20;

All this to say, that the Hegelian Dialectic standardizes a formula around progress, and this formula is one with which ACEL's philosophy of history has a number of touchpoints that were not considered in its original formulation (far more than can be said here, and even more in the book that, out of considerations of space, had to be overlooked). This type of relationship—where the relevant figure or idea was not a part of ACEL's theoretical development—can still be of still of tremendous aid and growth to ACEL, primarily with the intervention's retroactive application or overlay on top of some relevant piece of ACEL discourse, as doing so will likely enlighten new insights into ACEL's self-awareness. &#x20;

### Mises and _Agency_

Ludwig von Mises is a very different case than Hegel for ACEL. Known very well prior, Mises is fundamental to ACEL's creation: his real world contributions as well as his philosophies established the groundwork of not only ACEL, but also that of e/acc, especially as they pertained to systems theory. His renowned advocacy for free-market capitalism, for instance, what he logically proved—to the U.S.S.R., no less—that free market capitalism was truly the only societal economy of scale that worked. This extends to all systems: they must be open to the free exchange of information and opposed to variant suppressants; as noted prior this also how intelligence, knowledge, is most efficiently and most effectively acquired and transmitted, for, as we know, the free market of ideas is where good ideas flourish, and bad ideas die.&#x20;

Mises is especially important to ACEL for his theoretical expositions on _agency_, a concept that more or less defines ACEL's methodology. Mises' was a champion of the individual human and considered each singular person's agency in his deductions, which supports ACEL's sense of holism and that every being endowed with agency is valued. His model was autonomous, agency-filled, teleologically-oriented subject. This is none other than ACEL's subject: one with preferences and purposes and goals; with the capacity, the will, and the knowledge to reach, acquire, or achieve those goals; one who deliberately chose which purposeful movement to make to get them.&#x20;

Truly, to the extent that Mises was foundational to the organization of thought in ACEL's philosophy, it may be no overstatement to suggest that for ACEL, Mises's agent is Nietzsche's 'Übermensch'. With this, we have the figure who was inspirational to the founding of ACEL. &#x20;

### Dawkins' _Memes_&#x20;

Lastly, there is Richard Dawkins, whose groundbreaking work in memesis and cultural evolution as a secondary pathway for information transference (the genetic pathway being the first), was influential to the development of ideas contained in this text primarily insofar as the material information was available. That is to say, Dawkins is unlike Mises for ACEL, in that neither he himself as a figurehead nor his 1976 seminal text _The Selfish Gene_ in which he introduced the concept of 'memes', could be said to be the inspiring ground in ACEL's original deployment of memesis. In this way, ACEL's placement of memetic transference as central to the acceleration of intelligence was closer to Hegel's 'history' in this respect; the key difference here being that ACEL was keenly aware of the mechanisms of memesis prior to ACEL's development.&#x20;

This, then, brings us to our last word on scholarship prior to entering the core chapters of the book.

### A Quick Word on Scholarship

Insofar as _Accelerate or Die_ holds the dual intentions to be a sober, philosophical exploration of "_the way things are, and the way things could be_" as well as methodological proposition "_how we get there_" (Holbraad), the writers have made valiant efforts to use the most appropriate source material in a given area. That is to say, it at once has sought to source the most up to date scientific findings where needed, while also having on call a "back of the hand" type knowledge of the works of the entirety of the great philosophers of modernity. This is the case for all three 'modes' of knowledge that arrived to the creation of the book: how intimately a field was known in advance mattered not, the research team scoured every book known and not known to them that could be found on the subjects they treat. Should any oversights or gaps in knowledge base cause remiss here, we take it upon ourselves.&#x20;

With that, we enter the world-building of _Accelerate or Die_.&#x20;

