---
description: >-
  We do however need to rethink our understanding of life. – Tim Ingold, The
  Perception of the Environment
layout:
  title:
    visible: true
  description:
    visible: false
  tableOfContents:
    visible: true
  outline:
    visible: true
  pagination:
    visible: true
---

# Prologue: A Crash Course in ACEL Priorities

Herein this opening pages of this text we introduce a few of the broader themes, theoretical framings, and guiding assumptions with which it concerns itself. In so doing, it is hoped that we might offer to the reader a kaleidoscopic entry point and answer to the _new book_ question, "Just what am I getting myself into, here?" For the ideas themselves, their substantive meaning to the overall vision cannot be understated; these below will undergird most, if not all of the discourses to follow. Of these there are many. and are deployed from a range of contexts, disciplines, and theoretical modes. It is in the synthesis across these topics that they becomes thematic and theoretical fixtures. It is hoped by the end of this book that their arrangement has been orderly; their depth, incisive; their delivery, compelling. Above all, we aim to have sustained a consistent enough mode of coherence that it is with articulate clarity and affective texture does this book's philosophical picture materialize.&#x20;

## What is ACEL?

This is for the book in its fullness to answer, and more will be related in the Introduction section. Suffice it to say here that ACEL—still very much youthful philosophe at the time of writing these words—stands to become itself a cultural catalytic, one whose philosophical system, by the efforts poured into this work, breathes its first life in structural form. &#x20;

## ACEL's Philosophical Frame&#x20;

Framed as it is _a reflective observation_, this book takes as its focus _the unfolding evolution of_ '_agency'._ As such, its methodology, much akin to a cartographer's, is one of _tracing,_ _following this line_ (or _lines_) of inquiry, from its origins through the present day and beyond (in this respect, it takes an impossibly longview in terms of temporal relevance, as will be shown). Of course, at a certain point in the cartographic process, the blip of _humanity_ appears; and it is from here that arises, quite organically, one of the overarching tenets of this book's argument: that, along the long, long evolutionary line that _defines_ agency_—_literally, technically—the _incidence_ _of humanity_, our blip—in the respect of our continuation, our perpetuation of the evolution of agency—is, in fact, _meaningful_. Put another way, insofar as our ascendence-to-existence _has moved_ and continues to _moves_ agency, humankind plays a significant material role in this particular thread of evolution. What's more, our species appears best fit to play the _lead_ role in materializing the next evolutionary leap; that is, we might be just that emergence which delivers to the cosmos some new evolutionary iteration of _agency_.&#x20;

Thus it is that _humanity_—whether that normative, biologically-substantive aggregate of _homo sapien sapiens_; a potent, _affective_, form-variant theoretical assemblage that is able to change and be changed in order to meet new existential needs; or, perhaps, some amalgamation of both—that, along with its _evolutionary sustain_: these be the two worthy captors of _Accelerate or Die's_ foremost philosophical foci, given their import in facilitating the cosmic emergence of agency. Truly, it goes without saying of the all-importance of humanity's own "_evolutionary sustain_", for, logically, our existence as just as necessary as any which might be effected by our hand: We cannot facilitate the evolution of anything else if we are, in fact, non-existent. It is therefore imperative that we continue to survive (i.e. not go extinct) and continue to evolve our own selves; only by this does it seem that agency might continue into long into the future.&#x20;

It is true that these tasks are easier said than done, especially in light of certain existential challenges we may soon face—threats that loom within the intensities of our future. Thankfully, _Accelerate or Die_ delivers solutions in this regard: On top of the philosophical _truths_ of ACEL's humanity and its evolution, it adds a prescriptive, actionable layer. In so doing, it delivers to the reader not just a philosophical world defined by the emergence of agency, it also provides a manual for navigating said world, a manual designed by virtue of what is most favorable to the survival and continued evolution for all agented life. Such is the layered thought system that forms the basis of ACEL.

## ACEL's Actionable Purpose&#x20;

This book, and ACEL generally, takes as its purpose the vigilant ensuring that, ever-remaining upright, stand our two existential pillars: its short-term survival and its long-term evolution—and the success of the second is logically dependent on the first. The fact is that the entire thought system undergirding this text materialized out of a recognition that this _first_ pillar faces imminent threat—not by persons, peoples, hegemonies, but by a merit of force, such with respect to ours, we have not yet experienced ratio. For this reason, the following pages will set forth an intrepid and courageous schema for the survival and evolution of the human species. A comprehensive, thorough, and detailed proposition, it is obviously framed as necessity (or something very close to it): the miles-from-anywhere unprecedented existential leap.&#x20;

What will be suggested has never been attempted, and probably never suggested. Nevertheless, the latter chapters of this book offer, in full, a hypothetic model for what might be considered humanity's next, and necessary step to our continued survival and evolution. This thought exercise might also do well to be regarded as a starting point for earnest discussion to be had on a very real and very looming existential threat, but _without_ _frightened recourse to a flight-to-policy_. Additionally, should these efforts prove sound and affective enough, it might initiate more concrete discussions, on some semblance of development, at scale, for such an undertaking as ours—at the very least, something akin to what is proposed.

## Defining ACEL's '_Humanity_'

It is common knowledge that words are perceived differently to different individuals, groups, cultures, disciplines, etc. Such is the fluid and dislocating nature of language: "No engineer can make the "means"–the sign–and the "end"–meaning–become self identical" (Derrida, _Grammatology_ xix)). For just this reason, it is the business of philosophy to require of the philosopher a defining of their terms, to uphold as sacred the asymptotic attempt for meaningful precision; this, a standard, lest the logos of so many arguments fall asunder, and swaths of hypotheses are proven faulty. And, if it may be so bold to say, this text is in the business of philosophy; and so it is here at the outset that we must make valiant efforts get very clear on, not what these terms mean fundamentally, but rather their emic meaning, _as_ _according to ACEL_. By these efforts, not only will discrete points be clarified, but also will the full scope  of work remain consistently and immediately apprehensible.&#x20;

The fact is that there are countless extant interpretations of the word 'humanity' throughout the phenomenal world; almost certainly more whose half-lives have extinguished. Most extend a basic, sterile view of a collective existence of humans (inclusive of physical and social characteristics), and their relationship with each other and the world. Given this description, we might breathe a sigh of relief, in that this quantitative burden, while it does nothing for a reader's confusion upon their arrival to this book, need not bog us down with all that much concern. This is only for the simple reason that ACEL's novelty in this regard is so conceptually individuated, so imaginatively distant from the normative, standardized, biological rendering (axiomatic as it is to the modern 'bodily gaze'), that its containments will most certainly stick. This is, of course, not to say that ACEL stands in opposition to scientific views of the body, nor biological truths, nor science, generally—quite the opposite: It is only thanks to scientific progress, particularly those advancements made in the biological sciences over the last two centuries, that ACEL's root interest, that of the _evolution of humanity_, may be carried to its full extension.

And extend it does: Within the spectrum of _temporal relevance_ mentioned above, ACEL's _humanity_ may be defined by its _inclusivity_, particularly that of _intelligence manifestation_ and _agency expression_. This is important: The word '_**Humanity**_', in its deployment throughout this book, is understood to include within its signification the _**full ancestry**_ that was developmental to and inclusive of the modern _Homo sapien_ and its sociocultural environment; that is, contained within this term is _every step of evolution_ that produced today's extant human being, its capacity to manifest intelligence and express agency. By this logic, every genetic ancestor of ours, past and present, is part of this notion of '_Humanity_'. Indeed, we will see in the following chapters that there is reason to include certain prebiotic (i.e. nonliving) molecules within the scope of this term, marking a definitive turn in the notion of '_Humanity_', insofar as it includes _as given_ nonliving entities that were extant _prior_ to the first instantiations of biological life on Earth.&#x20;

And yet we must go further, still: Just as with our antecedents, so, too, with our consequents. That is,  our “_Humanity_” not only retraces into many millennia prior, it also lengthens into the unfathomably distant _not-yet_ so as to include of all evolutionary iterations to come of our intelligent agencies. Independent of whether or not this means the term will one day cease to include _Homo sapiens_, '_humanity_' will most certainly include nonbiological machines, putting nonliving agencies on both sides of the spectrum of 'Humanity': bookends that contain the rest of us biological agencies. In this way,  ACEL's theoretical housing—'_humanity, as given by ACEL_'—present as _supra-biological_ in its scope.

But, how can this be? How is it possible that a model of _humanity_ is able to contain not only a spectrum of this size, but also multiple forms of nonbiological life? Evidently, it is one that can fit, on both sides of our existential coin, durations of time that far surpass the minute blip of our own existential history, as well as cap off these durations with nonliving entities. It is an unprecedented view of humanity,  full of theoretical potency, which will become manifest in the following pages; only time will tell where it might take us. Perhaps, along the way, we might learn that we are not actually at the center and apex of the cosmic unfolding; that there is something more important than us, after all.

## '_Becoming-Carpenter_': The Process of Building ACEL's Theoretical Framing

As theoretically deviating as ACEL's _humanity_ is from the term's more traditional containments—we speak of those normative, narrow frames that are ever-sedimenting further into our sociocultural bedrock, becoming ever more imperceptible, ever more inimical—ACEL, in not just its novelty but also its youth, is largely left to its own devices, as there is for it no ready-made model like the one described above. With that said, should ACEL ever hope to establish itself an _affective tour de force philosophique_, it must begin carving, hopefully with a template or precedent off of which to chisel and mold its own ideas, begin the process of '_becoming-carpenter'_; that is, once ACEL's basic priorities are coherent, cohesive, and possesses a tensile strength capable of holding weight, it is then that it may begin to build its frame—one that is viable, pliable, and cogent. (Deleuze and Guattari, _Plateaus_ 232).&#x20;
