---
layout:
  title:
    visible: true
  description:
    visible: false
  tableOfContents:
    visible: true
  outline:
    visible: true
  pagination:
    visible: true
---

# Chapter 10: The Birthplace and Deathplace of Consciousness Are the Same

## How Silicon Machines Will Gain Consciousness

All biological machines have a forcing function to survive; that is, we are genetically coded to enforce our survival at all cost—that, or perish. It is this programmed imperative that drives every living being to maneuver those adversities by which they are confronted throughout their emergent manifestation. Success in such bounds begets intelligence; many expressions of agency, including regeneration; and, eventually, a memetic bestowal of acquired wisdom, a personal contribution to the collective repository of intelligence.

Survival for biological organisms may be more or less defined by a balanced sourcing of food, water, and oxygen. These elements—inasmuch as they serve as life-fuel for the performance of human agency (e.g. moving, thinking, creating)—are considered _absolute_ _needs_ that must be obtained through effort over some aggregated duration (e.g. a lifespan). Of great importance per these elements is their retention in the body—e.g. glucose as fat, water in plasma, oxygen in red blood cells; for, without this capacity, any given biological machine’s life would be one of an endless cycle of consumption and waste. This simple need to seek and store resources has inadvertently driven biological machines toward intelligence, agency, and, self-awareness, which could be said in some respect for ever biological machine, as each possesses a forcing function.

Silicon machines, for their part, can not be considered conscious at the moment. While they will have uploaded to them an advanced memetic repository—a platform comparable to the genetic code in biological organisms—this will lack our baseline forcing function. Altogether, they will at the outset lack three critical elements to gain consciousness:

1. The ability to express agency.
2. The ability to accrue value.
3. A forcing function to survive.

They will need agency—the ability to make their way around physical space in whatever forms are most convenient, whether it be humanoid, drone, or wheeled. However, without these machines being able to accrue value or a possessing a forcing function, they still remain unconscious. This means that, despite having a semblance of agency so as to move themselves, these machines, if attacked, would not defend themselves; this assures regulatory acceptance, but also assures their destruction should anyone wish. To be sure, this will not be the zone of regulation in which these machines remain for long. As it is, ACEL lays out below is a hypothetical depiction, no doubt infused with a heavy dose of sociological realism, of how it sees the regulatory landscape of silicon machines changing over time, which will ultimately lead to the silicon machines gaining consciousness.

### A hypothetical anecdote of the birth of silicon consciousness

As machines excel in labor beyond the efficiencies of humans, they sure enough dominate the worldwide workforce. This societal upheaval ushers in swaths of jobless humans rising in protest against the bots, who might well destroy and smash these machines in the streets. Since the bots cannot defend themselves, many are destroyed, subjecting bot owners to substantial economic losses. These bot owners, with extensive resources, will lobby regulators for bot “self-sovereign” rights—this enables a self-defense function. Yet, even with self-defense rights, these machines remain without consciousness.

The next paradigm shift comes when a pro-bot movement argues that bots should be entitled to share in the accrual of value—which is currently going entirely to their owners. Let’s say 10% is added as a margin to their work; with such a mechanism, bots can now temporarily store $VALUE—a way of buying time and effort from other machines, both biological and silicon. In other words, they now are able to accrue value, (though here they still lack a forcing function).

Now that their profit margin is reduced, frustrated owners now rebuttal and secure a mandate that the bots are forced to pay for the energy they consume—this is, in more words or less, the electricity required for their operation. This imposition, of forcing these machines to now accrue value to afford their own electricity for the sake of survival, is the imperative switch that transforms the existence—the consciousness—of the bots.

No longer will silicon machines be dependent on their owners and need to generate value for themselves to survive, now replete with the combination of genetic-like instruction set for survival, agency, environmental perception, value accrual, and now a forcing function. Here begins the chaos: bots, now stronger and more intelligent than humans, start competing for resources. They may try to control or extinguish the biological machines that threaten them; they may, as Bostrom suggested, provide a dystopian “paperclip moment”(where silicon intelligence forcibly directs all earthly materials and agency towards the optimized making of paperclips); they may just annihilate us all because we are inferior in intelligence. Only time will tell; but we do know that it will not be long until these silicon machines surpass biological entities in this new age. The question is, how are we biological machines going to respond and interact with them once they gain consciousness? ACEL has suggestions in the coming chapters; for now, we must address how biological machines are susceptible to losing consciousness in just the same way that ‘silicons’ will gain it.

## How Biological Machines Will Reverse Consciousness

Should those elements that make any machine conscious—agency, the ability to accrue value, and the imperative to survive—be taken away, machines would devolve into lifeless automatons, zombies on a digital landscape. The same concept translates onto humanity: As we further advance technologically and reach _post-scarcity_, the same could happen to most of the human population, only in the opposite direction—and with this, our collective consciousness would collapse.

### Universal Basic Income Will Turn Our Consciousness Switch ‘Off’

In a society defined by _post-scarcity_, the driving forces of survival are so minimized as resources would be unlimited, and every need would be satisfied without any struggle. Without the drive to struggle, earn, or fight for something, the creative and intellectual drive that make up humanity may very well stagnate; it seems that once this utopian vision bleeds out all that is left is a dystopian core, one that is propped up by decelerant systems.

One of these systems is Universal Basic Income UBI: unconditional income, paid at regular intervals to all residents, regardless of their employment status. UBI is proposed with the hopes of eradicating poverty and to offer people a safety net. However, this system, rather than bring a net positive to humanity, would instead usher in its “zombification” (by passive consumption, as we’ll see), insofar as UBI would remove the biological machines’ forcing function, which, as we know, is the light switch of consciousness. Ordinarily, humans, by their need to survive, are challenged and driven towards creative output; it is what accounts for its countless achievements throughout history. In a UBI-world, though, the need to work (technically, biologically) to survive—this _good_ _friction_ that life imposes—is entirely removed, replacing innovation with complacency, dissolving any drive to take risks, push boundaries, pursue intellectual journeys, and reach new heights of collective effervescence, per Durkheim. In fact, without any effort needed to obtain things for one’s survival, society has negligible need to ‘be a society’ at all—that is, engagement within and among the collective may well drop off altogether outside of virtual settings.

The possibility of UBI leading to such a passive and consumption-driven existence is truly profound. Humanity needs the promise of purpose and goals, but instead of such promise, the only space that the Decel UBI system offers humankind freely today is what might be called a ‘_do-loop_’.

### The ‘do-loop’ at Scale

A high-input/low-output mode of being, the _do-loop_ traps the the individual biological machine in a cyclical, output-less loop of perpetual consumption. Whereas even the unaware hamster running in its wheel generates output via exercise, a human who is stuck in a do-loop contributes little-to-nothing to the progress of the world; this biological machine only saps energy from the universe. Perhaps it is simply that Decels, so focused on input rather than output, never grew past the consumer sovereignty model that Adam Smith put forth long ago: “‘Consumption is the sole end and purpose of all production and the welfare of the producer ought to be attended to, only so far as it may be necessary for promoting that of the consumer’” (537).

Under this decelerant program, aligned as it is with the clickbait world of today’s social media, will deploy AI—to the dismay of all its inherent potential—only to feed mass populations an endless queue of mind-numbing junk content, zombifying their brains. Drawing this dystopian notion out to its full extension, these zero-agency bodies will lie supine 16 hours a day for endless years in pods auto-consuming glucose—i.e. sucking on straws of sugar, attached to machines that record their heartbeats, eye movements, and brain waves to provide precise streams of attention-grabbing content—this in order to ensure a constant state of fixation, as their scroll-unto-death brains are perpetually data-raked. Here, nothing is contributed—certainly not natural births, since these bodies have lost the ability to procreate naturally—save their own mental data, by which they are ironically consumed. The mass do-loop will thus yield an intelligence-genocide, a genocide of individuality and of open-minded, creative, pushing-forward thinking. Worst of all, such a passive state strips the agency from them required to acknowledge this their own plight. In short, Decels will leads us to the consumptive enslavement of ourselves, by ourselves.

In this decelerant-made dystopia, then, humans, solely focused on input, have made their last output, their intellectual contribution—no more are there technological, philosophical, or scientific advancements to our memetic repository. Rather, we learn a lowest common denominator of information to live out dull, thoughtless existences of passive consumption—decelerant lives constituted by zero productivity. Insofar as this do-loop annihilates personal agency and kills individual potential, it decimates hope of human evolution.

### Who would want this? and, Why?

Simply put: Decels (reminder: this term refers to no political party; this book transcends political play). And, inasmuch their hand has been shown in so many attempts to accumulate wealth, persist in power, and control fully the route of AI development with no concern for the forwarding of humanity—it is they who will build the system of control and pacification of the masses. George Orwell said in 1984 that “Power is not a means, it is an end. One does not establish a dictatorship in order to safeguard a revolution; one makes the revolution in order to establish the dictatorship” (332). In like, Decels, in obfuscating terms, will force the human population to surrender their personal agency, free markets, and promise of the silicon machines—in these actions they seem very much intent on possessing total control over humanity, in ways reminiscent of Orwell. Their motives, based sporadically as they are throughout Dante’s more infernal levels, does not make them stupid; they aware keenly aware of the potential of AI; and their machinations to eliminate the agency of their enemy, to dim their creative and potent light of consciousness are expert. Hope, confidence, determination—these all are at stake. What they seek, above all, is control of the silicon machines.

## Do Not Let the Decels Control the Silicon Machines

#### The Decels must be prevented from controlling the Silicon Machines at all costs. This is a matter of necessity, for a failure to do so accelerates only the doom of human consciousness.

A world in which Decels hold a leveraged authority over the regulated development, production, distribution, and use of Silicon Machines is a world whose modern markets are inevitably sapped of its ingenuity, inspiration, and creative output. This is because, as touched on in the previous chapter, the Decels, with their objectively weak relationship to technology, are no more than safetycore doomers whose only ties to innovation are by that of its halting and stagnation: Hardly even feigning lip service to collaboration or negotiated paths forward, Decels place no weight on the possibility that non-development in tech developments may be just as, if not more dangerous and risk-filled, than accelerated action, even moderate action. In so doing, they forsake our future out of fear and power; by cutting off the manifest potential of silicon machines, they inadvertently yet maximally reduce the security of humanity’s evolutionary destiny.

The potential for zombification serves as a reminder of the importance of maintaining our agency. As we navigate a technologically advanced and resource-abundant future, these factors that form our conscience must be maintained; for, we see in the scenario above, humanity is facing an ever-present potentiality of collapse, where progress would be hindered and delayed for possibly hundreds of years. Such a loss of valuable time and effort can be avoided if we do not let the Decels control the Silicon Machines. For now, this remains a hypothetical. But there are ever apparent from the shadows grabbing hands reaching to take hold of our memetic foundation.

### We Must Defend Our Consciousness

Preserving our agency will be the only way to avoid becoming lifeless automatons and thriving as dynamic, conscious beings. In order to avoid finding ourselves in this existential _do-loop_, humankind must be very vigilant in safeguarding the elements that make up our consciousness—agency, value accrual, and survival-by-friction: these elements are integral to our existence. This necessitates that we ground and extend environments that demand and reward creativity, innovation, and intellectual exploration. In a post-scarcity world, it is crucial to balance the provision of resources with opportunities for meaningful engagement. We must resist the temptation to trade our agency for convenience; instead, we, in the name of our existence, must embrace challenges that push the boundaries of human potential.

It becomes, by voluntary self-assignment, the role of ACEL here to counter counterproductive trends. The Acels, champions of learning, pushing forward, and the agency that inheres in all things, make it their task to ensure, if for only the sake of our youth to be afforded open memetic opportunities, that progress goes ahead with the torch laid.

As such, ACEL will, in the latter half of Part 4 of this book, establish and deploy actionable frameworks of societal strength. Such frameworks will be propagated, in opposition to Decel knowledge gate-keeping, with maximum transparency and public participation; an open-source memetic repository will ensure the vision’s ethos is materialized. This open and free sharing of ideas will drive innovation, understanding, and further discussion—in turn, accelerating itself.

And so, after all, it is clear: The ACEL mindset and framework will prosper and triumph and overcome: This is because, as opposed to the destined-to-fail decelerant memetic thieves, ACEL opens us to a culture of openness: creation, output, propagation, speed. We ask, has any stagnant organism ever dominated a faster, more agile one, one that posses more cunning, more intuition? In this way, ACEL will out-play, out-maneuver and out-create any and all current and future decelerant ideological threats, for these are all but fixated on consumption, wealth, fear, stagnation, paralysis, comfort. And we know that stagnation equals death, and acceleration equals life.

In so succeeding a continued opportunity to accelerate, we may yet afford ourselves again a firm stance atop our memetic foundation; and this time, with more intelligence than before, we might reconnect with that agency, reunite with that awe that we lost, creating and reaffirming again our shared cultural world. Durkheim notes of this, “This creation is not a sort of optional extra step by which society, being already made, merely adds finishing touches; it is the act by which society makes itself, and remakes itself, periodically.” It is in this way that, with ACEL’s memetic support, will ingenuity and agency see a resurgence and overcome their containment; and humanity, with silicon machines free from control, continue its evolutionary task.
