---
layout:
  title:
    visible: true
  description:
    visible: false
  tableOfContents:
    visible: true
  outline:
    visible: true
  pagination:
    visible: true
---

# Chapter 9: The Decelerating Power of Fear

### Fear: The Last Boss

For ACEL, there is but one abstract enemy standing in the way of achieving the prior chapter's ultimate evolutionary goal: Fear. Of this primal force, H.P. Lovecraft, says in _Supernatural Horror in Literature_, "The oldest and strongest emotion of mankind is fear," (Lovecraft 1). Indeed, it does seem that by the hand of fear, even the most ambitious can have their intensity-in-promise derailed, annihilated.&#x20;

#### Utilities of Early Human Fear

To be sure, in an historical sense, fear has carried with it an absolute utility to human life and evolutionary continuity. We owe much of our species' historical survival to our "fight-or-flight" response, a concept coined by American physiologist Walter Bradford Cannon. In his 1932 medical theory publication, _The Wisdom of the Body_, Cannon asserts that physical and psychological crises trigger a hypothalamic reaction that activates the sympathetic nervous system, causing adrenaline to be released into the bloodstream; the subsequent increase in heart rate and other temporary physiological shifts prepare the body for quick action (Cannon). In other words, Cannon claims then when our bodies engage with threatening stimuli, our mental computer executes an auto-function and informs us of how to best survive said threat.&#x20;

In this medical theory, fear—or, rather, the anticipation of fear—is the primary determinant for survival. Historically, this makes sense: Consider our early human ancestors of the late Middle Pleistocene epoch, whose predators posed an ever-credible threat (Cancellieri et al.). In any engaged moment of intensity between an early man and a nearby dangerous animal, say, a saber-toothed tiger, his body's ability to anticipate fear effectuated his survival (hopefully). Likely, our early man experienced a number of _true_ life-or-death situations throughout his life, each one reenforcing the last, strengthening this hypothalamic response; down through the countless lines of offspring would it finally arrive to us, ultra-fortified, right when we no longer really need it.&#x20;

#### Futilities of Fear in Modernity

As it is, we are still programmed to run from this very same sabertooth tiger, despite the fact that this beast has been extinct for over 11,000 years (Britannica).  Considering this, might we be walking around with some severely outdated, skittish, even faulty neurological software? As we know well how computers can act when we neglect their regular updates, might this obvious low-version inefficiency in our embodiment cause us any problems in the future?&#x20;

To be sure, in rare modern moments—say, to veer away from the last-minute swerve of a drunk driver, or to run from a killer—the threat-trigger does indeed aid in our survival. But note the modifier _rare_ here: for, in the comforts of our modern world, where the majority of humans have never actually experienced a _true_ life-threatening situation and likely never will, we no longer require this once-necessary hair-trigger sensitivity to perceived threats. The Academy of Ideas agrees, saying, "Today we live longer than ever before. Our chance of dying from war, natural disaster, pandemics, or starvation are at levels our ancestors could only have dreamed of" (Academy of Ideas). In fact, ACEL will argue that, while there was a period when this hypothalamic response was key to our evolutionary survival, it now threatens it, as it restrains us from moving forward during non-crises moments it mistakes for such. In these instances, we quite literally _overreact_ with fear; the Academy of Ideas implies the needlessness of this overreaction, stating, "Hardly anyone questions, however, whether we should be so fearful." We've become handicapped by our anachronistic biology that hasn't yet adapted to the nonthreatening world in which we live. In a word, our brains _malfunction_, fearing threats that in fact do not exist.&#x20;

Should this pattern persist in our collective behavior, we will undoubtedly miss opportunities to activate our potential and agency when they are most essential for evolutionary leaps. For ACEL, this is not acceptable, as any missed opportunity poses a potentially damning threat to our species' progress; and thus is why _fear_ is the most crippling factor to human evolution: It is the "brake pedal" to our evolutionary car. And, when this brake that is fear is pressed down, the fearful human, inherently full of intense potency—_decelerates_. Decelerated by fear, this fearful human linearly reduces their infinite possibilities to an area of finite space no bigger than one's own safe driveway.&#x20;

#### The Perils of Safetyism

Here we arrive to the ironically dangerous jump from fear to safety. Logically, fear breeds the desire for safety. For our late Middle Pleistocene man, this search for safety made complete sense: Why risk your life sleeping out in the open when you would be much more likely to survive sleeping in a cave? Certainly, it makes sense to try to not die.&#x20;

With this "minimize-fear/maximize-safety" methodology steering our evolutionary ship, then, humans set out across seas of millennia and change. Needless to say, our methodology has succeeded, _technically_, as we are currently alive. "But, for how long?", is now the question; for, as we have safety-padded our existences into zero-risk children's bouncy castles, how much resilience will we really have when the _real_ threats inevitably come imposing upon us again? The answer, at first glance, seem to be: "well, not very much".

The hegemonic structures of Western culture are in part to blame for this modern no-risk Safetyism. The Academy of Ideas holds that "The quest for safety has become the raison d’etre of the West ... the rules and restrictions erected at the altar of safety have ballooned to absurd proportions and intruded on evermore areas of life ... no matter how irrational or authoritarian they are ... no matter whether there is any evidence ... safety rules and restrictions are held by most people to be essential and beyond question." And, while they have beaten this dead horse of safety-or-bust into us far beyond the baseline adult need to be told , we have not evolved one biological inch closer to removing our all-but-redundant fear-instinct, no closer are we in replacing it with a response more apposite to our contemporary situation.&#x20;

#### Comfort is a Brain-Eater&#x20;

Instead, this vestigial appetite to maximize safety has only found humans decaying both body and mind in self-restricting, agency-murdering comfort zones. Now, we are too cozy to pursue risk, too apathetic to advance into the unknown: Comfort has silently and cruelly displaced safety. This process started in subtle ways to come into form during the Industrial Revolution: When reduced was the need for physical labor, _comfort_ began to take its ascent as a Western priority. While falling off somewhat prior to the turn of the century, the digital information age has seen a resurgence in the West's interests in indenting couch cushions, as sedentary, zero-risk, tech-based activities dominate our day-to-day lives, doing for the most part, zero-good. (Krantz-Kent).&#x20;

Certainly, this sheepish avoidance of risk in the pursuit of safety and comfort was not always the standard. The Academy of Ideas states, "In Ancient Greece and Rome, courage was held in high regard ... individuals were proactive in the face of risks and daring ... 'Fortune favours the brave', according to the Latin proverb ... in many past civilizations it was acknowledged that uncertainty is not only a source of potential danger but also of opportunity." They then compare that to now, saying

> Instead of being celebrated, today the risk-taker is often castigated as foolish, selfish, and a danger to both himself and others. This negative perception of risk-taking is driven by worst-case thinking ... This ... has even infiltrated the highest levels of government ... politicians and policy makers have adopted the utopian goal of socially-engineering a “zero-risk” society... to the applause of the fearful masses. (Academy of Ideas)

So, truly, how condemnable is it of the supine couch potato to find tantalizing the every-half-hour spritz of his living room air freshener as he asks, "Why do anything else?" The answer is: enough.&#x20;

We ought to know that our decelerant Western hegemonies have it in for anyone who aims to embrace life outside of their prescriptive model, so to the accelerator, their influence, that is more or less a given, is hardly to blame for our laziness. So, even more than our soulless rulers who are paid by safety lobbyists for every inch of risk they take from us, what source have we to blame for this long still-wind on our evolutionary voyage? It is none but fear itself: the mind killer.&#x20;

If not obvious to the reader at this point, humans as a species walk a very precarious trapeze wire here, all while in this fear-spelled trance. For, while perhaps entirely inadvertent and unintentional, we have let the phantom of fear displace our exploratory, risk-on agencies into padded bubbles unmoved by a dull, existential inertia. We are stuck in The Doldrums of the The Phantom Tollbooth. Sociologist Frank Furedi says of this inert space in his book _How Fear Works_, “ … this perspective \[of fear] has been so thoroughly internalized that many who adopt this outlook are not aware of its influence on their behaviour ... fear works by sensitizing people to focus on potential threats and dangers while distracting attention from the probable positive outcome of engaging with uncertainty” (61).  Something must be done to shake loose these chains of stagnation and this zero-risk stupor so that we may again smell an open-door fresh air of opportunities unknown.&#x20;

#### ACEL Wages War Against Fear

ACEL claims that overcoming the cause and consequence of fear, by sheer will alone if necessary, is not optional for our species: It is, in an absolute sense, _essential_, _imperative_ to our survival and evolution as a species_._ ACEL states that what _has_ been optional this whole time, rather ironically, has been our acquiescence to the self-induced shackles of fear, our meek submission to a life of unengaged agency, of decelerating into stagnation and retreat. What promising news! for this implies a hope that _what_ _must be done_, _can_ _be done_.

Are we _all_ able to kill the Mind Killer, then? ACEL is very clear on this point. It claims that the litmus test for possessing an ability to master fear and so _accelerate_ follows as thus: If you are not _lobotomized_, then you are capable (for a lobotomy is an imposed removal of agency by external means); you possess the agency to "break" fear, as a true cowboy possesses the ability to break a wild horse. We are therefore all capable of unfettering ourselves from the modern hypnoses of fear, safety, and comfort, and turning aboutface to contain that which once contained us. From here, we may resume our continued growth and evolution.&#x20;

No simple task, the strength of ACEL arrives to the mind killer with an intensity and brazen boldness so as to embrace and master it. Mastery opens a new door, one where the unknown looms no longer as a shadowy threat, but as an enticing opportunity to transform darkness to light the way of consciousness. Fear will quit its barking, it will stop and retreat when disengaged; its displacer while come as a green light to place us back on track so that we may move forward. In overcoming fear on a collective scale, ACEL helps foster a culture that values resilience and bravery, encourages advancement in the face of uncertainty, engages agency and explores curiosity; in short, it accelerates all things. As Nietzsche said in _Thus Spoke Zarathustra_, "It is the surrender of the greatest to run risk and danger, and play dice for death." ACEL enjoys the game with Nietzsche.&#x20;

### Woke Ideology & The Structural Integrity of Our Memetic Foundations

#### Setting the Scene

_Whether acknowledged or not, at this very moment, every human on planet Earth carries their existence—and all possible future existences that live within them_ in potentia_—over a thin and continually thinning ground; this, our species long-treasured, last-stop topographical shroud sheltering the bunker that contains humanity's most salient memetic structures: the hand-plucked, deposit prepense longest half-lives. Now, but a slow collapse witnessed; it steadily disintegrates under our feet, with fingerprints evidencing foul play._&#x20;

#### Contextualizing the Analogy

What does this image mean, or refer to, exactly? What is the analogy being made?

The above micro-scene analogizes an _attempted burglary_ made on virtually every memetic pillar holding up the modern Western world, those memes most vital to the the basic structures of collective rational thought and healthy, socially-adaptive living.&#x20;

To offer insight into the magnitude of this decelerant _grand heist_, here is but a sliver of the sprawl of ideological targets: religion (Schmitz), medicine (Kao), education (Mintz), energy usage (Tyrrell), freedom (Weissenberger), creativity (Thoraval), entertainment (Wilford), logic (Hanson), social norms (Neiman), biology (Bartosch), literary aesthetics (Aristophenes), debate (Lindsay), mathematics (Barron), government (McGinnis), value systems (Poojar), the individual moral compass (Funk) -- truly _gargantuan_ memes on which we base our lives, from the simple "waving hello" all the way to arithmetical proofs. More, this subterfuge has made it overtly clear that it is an all-or-nothing enterprise: All of humanity's memes are the target; and, as has been shown, they are pursued by an ideology willing to acquire them through force.&#x20;

How do the perpetrators of this ideology actually intend to inhibit such a strong suite of agencies, such rich-in-half-life forces; how have they tried to prohibit all of the creative outputs contained within our memetic and genetic repositories? Quite childishly, it seems (Boudreaux). They have found great success already through their weaponization of the public sphere: With open-forum harassments, media pressure, and accusations that threaten—and have actually killed—long, successful careers, this ideology claims itself judge, jury, and executioner—without any basis other than their own self-aggrandizing memetic repository—in its rendering verdicts to those individuals and the thoughts they posit that oppose this ideology in even the slightest way. In so doing, they have successfully ground to a halt  careers, so many creative outputs proferred by accelerant agents, so many (in their eyes) potentially-risqué acts of individual, creative thought. These would-be contributions to our memetic and genetic repositories and instead bastardized into fractured, impotent, deformed memetic holograms of their once strong selves. And, while the above grocery list of memetic loot is almost laughable in the absurdity of its range, the fact remains that, with each attempted nab, this ideology has in fact gained ground (Doubek et al.); with each effort it inches closer to achieving its goal. In other words, its coercive maneuvering, its squeaky-wheeled bullying might actually, eventually effect its success.&#x20;

#### Naming the Threat

But, what _is_ our threat, exactly—who composes this group of bandits who wish to subvert the memetic foundations on which modernity stands? Who are these inhibitors of agency, of creative output—who stop us from adding to the collective memetic and genetic repositories? We speak here of the wolf in sheep's clothes: _Woke Ideology_, a collegiate-to-cultural movement (Lindsay)—once thought by many to be (and perhaps was, for a moment) a crowning-achievement of modern-day morality—that now claims, in the open, authoritative intentions to assume creative control over our species' cultural catalog, so as to rewrite our species' memetic knowledge according to their accepted framework.&#x20;

In order to best confront and defeat the very real threats posed by Woke Ideology, we must first seek to understand its roots, so that we might cut them at their base.

#### Our Chasm of Meaning & its Exploitation&#x20;

As stated previously, humanity possesses inextinguishable curiosity: We have since our beginnings strove to peel back the layers of universal mystery kept beyond our grasp. With each advancing success in this pursuit, we at once cut ourselves in half by the double-edged sword of knowledge: With each unit of _knowing_ gained, we inherently experience a loss of awe, an agnosticism grown in the spirit, a disconnection to those things considered _holy_ or _sacred_. Our secularity, therefore, is born of our curiosity; and, so successful have we been in its appeasements, that we have utterly compartmentalized away both knowledge and awe.&#x20;

The contemporary body of human sciences agrees that this epistemic schism stems from 17th century French philosopher René Descartes' proclamation, "Cogito, ergo sum," or, "I think, therefore I am" (Ingold 77). This has led to, among other existential rifts in modern society, a separation between _Nature_ and _Mind_, _Self_ and _Other_, _Church_ and _State_. Each of these dichotomies weighs its own promise and its own burden on humanity's existential shoulders, but it is for the latter—that of the separation of Church and State—that we currently stand face-to-face with a great threat to our memetic foundations. While this separation has of course afforded humanity many priceless contributions to its memetic reservoir (the unfolding of democracy, to name one), it has also led to a _vacuum of meaning_, a chasm in our collective morality; for, our innate meaning now exists compartmentalized and cut off from a majority of our day-to-day life.&#x20;

Naturally, from this truth of modernity have begotten various attempts to fill our collective cavity of meaning, and indeed we are offered myriad options for the task at hand. Of all of these, of all the potential intensities that could materialize a successful filling of this chasm—"successful" only as measured by an _its being done—_the most likely to succeed also carries the most threatening potentiality to slide the orientation of our moral compass—indeed, should our national governments soon assume the role of creator and purveyor of meaning in our memetic world, our moral compass would soon experience less of a sliding than it would a being pushed.&#x20;

#### Government Imposition of a "Religion of the State"

We are indeed witnessing a forceful push today by a critical mass of governing bodies the world over to fill this very vacuum. With great success, these governments have grabbed hold of the memetic roots of our species' unadulterated collective morality, our intuitive sense of goodness, displacing what could be called our "original morality" with a fabricated societal moralism: a "Religion of the State", an agency-halting, virtue-signaling, guilt-tripping "moral legislation" that threatens our species' intuitive sense of good vs. evil, right vs. wrong, and our creative output to learn the difference.&#x20;

That it is the nature of governments to control their subjects to some degree is not news by any standard. However, the recent instantiation of control, this political capture by moralism, highlights an obvious vulnerability in our collective self-assurance: Our chasm of meaning (brought on by Church and State) is now being exploited by governments, those Religion-Imposters that now attempt social control on the grounds of morality. And because of all this, our societal self-assurance is unraveling at an alarming rate, leaving us open to memetic attack; and the damage caused by these hegemonic transgressions will take decades if not centuries to undo.

But why now? What do governments now possess that they did not before that affords them this opportunity to lead this full-frontal assault on humanity's innate sense of goodness? It appears that governments are appropriating the highly-effective moralistic tactics and methods executed by Woke Ideology, or Wokeism, by its quasi-religious name.

#### Woke Ideology: Basis, Methods, Dangers&#x20;

This potency-quashing subterfuge that governments are injecting into our developed society's fabric is no doubt fueled by Woke Ideology (Sen). While Wokeism may have bubbled up from university classrooms (Lindsay), its parasitic, agency-sapping strength as a stand-in for religion has undoubtedly infected a critical mass of the most powerful governments in the developed world.&#x20;

Wokeism is tricky, its inculcation tempting; if it is anything at all, it is _not_ the same movement it was but a few years ago. The Economist wrote in a 2021 article, "Until a few years ago 'woke' meant being alert to racial injustice and discrimination... In 1938 singer Huddie Ledbetter warned black people they 'best stay woke, keep their eyes open' going through Scottsboro, Alabama, the scene of a famous mistrial involving nine young black men" (The Economist). It certainly has not remained here, focused on the at-baseline legitimate platform of anti-racism. Instead, Wokeism has grown to become all but a catch-all phrase for what it deems as championing _all_ _things_ pro-inclusivity, pro-sustainability, pro-environment. Even in its growth, Wokeism has largely been able to retain in its public-image an ethos that appears benign, even helpful or beneficial to humanity (echos of Effective Altruism).

Yet, when scrutinized under a pro-humanity lens, it is subtly revealed that Wokeism, while diffusing its influence in the name of inclusivity, is in fact driven by a desire for totalitarian control executed through a lens of anti-human moralism. Their framework, trenchant in what now seems to be nothing more than a "power for power's sake" leads every facet of human output down a faucet of utter stagnation -- each success in the name of Wokeism is yet another gunpoint-holdup of a piece of our memetic knowledge, watched as its flushed down the sink drain of Marxist repute. In other words, the woke movement, in its use of public stigma, freezes in motion those agencies that would otherwise would contribute to our memetic repositories.&#x20;

Eventually, we will become tapped, fully diluted of creative output and risk-taking through fear of stigma. Thus is the end goal of Wokeism: a paralysis of thought and action, a Marxist celebration of middling. Fully adopted, Wokeism threatens the existence of human consciousness itself.&#x20;

#### A Destructive Ideological Turnover Under Our Feet

Returning to our original illustrative analogy, we thus attribute this disintegration and decay of our once sturdy memetic base to an approaching zero hour of ideological turnover, where the half-lives of our cultural repository's most impactful memes inch closer and closer to their metamorphosis, their sublimation at the hand of Woke Ideology. That is to say, the modern memetic foundations of our collective understanding of self—our social identity, our moral compass, our value systems—near their unintended but aggregated transmutation.

Or, this is already underway. And we are, as a species together, living immediate and shared witness to the emergent materialization of latent potentials that have laid-in-wait under our modern memetic foundation, and its supposed structural integrity. It may be—as the great memetic educator, Nature, and its governing body of physics, has cautioned us against—that we have too long leaned too heavy a concentrated weight on our memetic base; and, in breaching the threshold of its structural integrity, we have broken it, and allowed this bubbling volcanism of multiplicities to rise and contend for dominance (_As sand that slips through fingers when squeezed, perhaps we are to blame for our risking the loss of our memetic orientation_). It is here where Wokeism is putting forth a concerted, intimidating effort.&#x20;

This is all the more regrettable when considering our contemporary explosion of human intellect. Even while the "Religion of the State" extends its reach, our species' intellectual advancements run parallel to that extension, as we far outpace any other era that was defined by human advancement. Still, Woke Ideology threatens its continuation, posing a sincere threat to our ability to accelerate our intelligence.

Truly, where once Wokeism snarled its teeth in isolated incidents, now our larger societal structures are deemed at risk, if not considered already subsumed. We have already seen that our governmental structures have all but succumb to the squeaky wheel of Wokeism, whose values nearly one-to-one overlap their decelerant intents (i.e. both campaigns are backed by consumption, fear, and control). More importantly, though, it is _our_ education system, that, like wounded animal, sits in the open unprotected from motivated ideological predators who aim to embed via woke, contra-family surrogates a manufactured moral bearing. In controlling the upbringing minds of our youth, now, there exists a way to inculcate woke ideology into our species at the very start of life. We cannot allow this.&#x20;

For the minds of future generations are sensitive to specific inputs. They deserve the light of their consciousness to be activated, to be given the opportunity to contribute creatively to our collective memesis. Perhaps inadvertently and well-intentioned, the Western education system has allowed the woke enemy to walk through its doors; and it now sits in its own remiss no longer a proper guidance system for our youth. The system itself requires self-judgement, efficient corrective action, even its own forgiveness to cast out the parasitic ideology it has let consume it. There is still time to teach the young minds and embed them with all the necessary knowledge and skills to create powerful memes, to spread them as fast as possible, to double down on those that flourish. The creative spirit needs cultivating, as do critical thought and problem-solving skills; for our children, we must attend to this structural problem.&#x20;

### Path Forward: Open, Free, Memetic Output, Always

One more time we return to our scene-setting memetic-foundation-as-floor: Such is the case then that two primary contenders sit bubbling in the volcanic intensities within our cracking ground. First, the decelerant propagation of a woke, anti-human Religion of the State that threatens not just our species' output but our entire memetic self-awareness, that dilutes us all into a dull, gray, fear-based paralysis. The other: An accelerated promise of advancement, liberty in thought and curiosity, maximization of intelligence, prioritization of our youth's potential, which is far beyond our own.&#x20;

Such are our two options. Either iteration provides humanity clear direction.

Which shall we choose?&#x20;

Here we must not forget the Buddha's teaching of the "Parable of the Poisoned Arrow" in the Sutta Pitaka (Majihima Nikaya 2). Certainly, it is little use to seek the source or cause of one's imminent pain farther than it may issue resolution. It is imperative instead to remain practical and problem solve one's survival. Therefore, we must at all costs do just this: Assess our contemporary memetic threat only insofar as it helps rectifies the situation; then, we maximize our efforts in a chosen direction. For, while it is certain that a turning point is either coming or is here, what may not be certain is which memetic foundation will triumph.&#x20;
