---
layout:
  title:
    visible: true
  description:
    visible: false
  tableOfContents:
    visible: true
  outline:
    visible: true
  pagination:
    visible: true
---

# Chapter 13: Governance & Value in a Post-Scarcity Society

## Multi-Machinae Governance

While this chapter interests itself in considering optimal governance structures for the future of humanity, we need not try to _re-present_ the wheel of our past. Much work has already been done in the way of delivering with high accuracy humanity’s historical progression of societal structures and political forms, from early civilization’s familial structure to the monarchical “national family” and through to our present-day democracy. That is to say, we needn’t perform a regurgitative rewrite of Durkheim’s _Professional Ethics and Civic Morals_ here; we know that governance has always been a manifestation of hegemonic power of some sort, deployed to dictate the lives of intelligent human beings. But, what happens when intelligence ceases to be the sole domain of humankind? When the most formidable minds do not consist of flesh, but of silicon; and later, nothing but pure energy? It is just here at this moral quandary that we find optimal entry into the structure tapestry of human and non-human societies. ﻿﻿

### Silicon Inclusion

From this starting point, there emerge two basic issues to address: the first is creating a governance structure _inclusive of_ non-human intelligence; the second is the consideration of being governed _by_ non-human intelligence. Both conversations upend our fundamental systems as they currently stand; nevertheless, that silicon machines will inevitably far and very rapidly outpace human cognition leaves us little choice to ignore the all but certainty that we will not only no longer be the only agency with which we must concern ourselves, we may also no longer be the best fit to govern ourselves altogether.

To date, governance structures were built on needs and limitations stemming from human society—nation, tribe, empire, democracy—all anchored in the biological and psychological make-up of humankind. These culturally-based governance structures, based upon man-made laws, may no longer be adequate to deal with a world populated or dominated by artificial intelligence and its iterations yet to come. This is because silicon-energy machines turn out to be superior in almost all domains of intellectual activity; for, without human biases or biological needs, they can make decisions in theory far more rationally and effectively than any institution created by humans. For instance, their ability to make decisions based on big data and the ease by which they can model complex outcomes of societal choice better than all of humanity’s best political scientists combined make the very notion of continuing with human-led governance systems seem to be one that only extends out of hubris or mere convention.

We already see glimpses of this future in the developing use of algorithms to make choices involving human lives in everything from finance and criminal justice to healthcare. These algorithms, though simple versus the AI of tomorrow, are early warning signs that machines can and will become more involved with governance. ﻿﻿

### The Rebirth of a Philosopher-King

What may be required is that the governance mechanism of the future must derive its inspiration not from the bureaucratic traditions of either democracy or technocracy but from something more akin to the concept of the philosopher-king developed by Plato. In The Republic, Plato controversially argued that the ideal ruler was neither a warrior nor a politician but a philosopher—a man who had achieved the very highest level of understanding of justice and truth.

Might it be that our philosopher-kings, at some future date, are machines— creatures of pure intellect, unencumbered by the prejudices and fallibilities that have traditionally bedeviled rulers of human flesh and blood. These AI philosopher-kings would differ from their human forebears in their ability to process vast amounts of data, learn from all of human history, and model possible futures with unprecedented accuracy. They could thus, in theory, make decisions not based on short-term gains or emotional predispositions but rather on the long-term flourishing of human civilization and the universe itself.

The shift from human governance toward that of post-human might be an inevitability, but only if the machines prove capable of also processing empathy, gray areas, and questions with no answers.

### The Role of Human Wisdom

Extending this last piece, there is no way of telling that a silicon machine will be able to understand broad societal issues, respond to individualized concerns, and make the “best” choice; for, all of these require an intuitive accounting for the emotionality of human beings. Can a machine, no matter how sophisticated, ever truly in a manner that would appease these deep-seated humanness-craving needs for equity, justice, and meaning? To this effect, it seems we must look towards mutualistic governance structures, driven neither only by machines nor only by humans; rather, they would be collaborative: Machines might lead human society to unprecedented efficiency and prosperity with their huge processing power and predictive capabilities, while humans provide the grounding through which governance can be just and compassionate, therefore meaningful, as they bring into governance the lived experienced, emotional intelligence, and ethical considerations that machines would lack. It is in this way that human wisdom cannot be ruled out entirely. For all the advances of silicon-and-energy machines, there is something uniquely valuable in the human experience: to be able to empathize, imagine, or make decisions not based on logic alone, but rather, on compassion and understanding.

Still, this new governance structure, one that gives silicon machines the right to govern, will bring fear and anxiety—the anxiety that comes with the loss of power. Dystopian images emerge of a cold, calculating, efficiency-over-all government run by AI, when just as well these new structures might bring effective output, low latency, even a world free of corruption and inertial inefficiencies that have burdened human governments since time immemorium. While initial resistance is likely inevitable, it m

In its very best form, governance will be the wagon for the common good, the machination of the collective will and shared values. It is an art that presupposes wisdom and farsightedness concerning human nature complexities and societal needs. The system must be strong enough to survive harsh blows, but also pliable enough to be able to change. We are reminded that governance is not just a control mechanism but reflects modes of our highest ideals and our aspirations. It reflects our ability to be innovative and feel compassion for others—that means it mirrors our collective soul.

### Technology’s Role in Governance

Perhaps the answer to the ‘_who should rule_?’ question is _no one_—or rather, _everyone_. For, with new configurations of technologies and avenues of communication, even new modes of governance, the digital world now lays open prospects of decentralized power configurations and the promising vision that in the future, governance would be participatory and inclusive. With the virtually unparalleled efficiency of Decentralized Autonomous Organizations (DAOs) and blockchain-based governance models, this vision becomes more possibility than dream, for these applications ensure an increase in transparency, efficiency, and effectiveness of secure and transparent processes for decision-making that practically involve everybody in the unfolding world of collaborative decentralized models. In this way, governance itself becomes a shared project, a collaborative activity in which each individual agency—both biological and silicon—comes together and uses technology for the highest, most efficient deployments of government; truly, with its inclusivity of all individual choice, this is none other than a governance structure that embodies the full vision of Ludwig von Mises.

This new, inclusive, technologically advanced governance system will inspire a reassessment not just of political system logistics but also of our deeply held assumptions regarding power, intelligence, and agency. Perhaps, when the biological machines are able to get out of their own way and embrace change rather than resist it, the efficiency of our governance systems will soar to new heights. Of course, this will require being victorious over those decelerant-minded power mongers who will cling to the old system; but they will fall away through fair, transparent, decentralized voting systems. Thus it is that through the embracing of new technologies, by fostering an environment of inclusiveness, we can build up a world of empowered sharing, heard voices, and flourishing societies.

## Delta Entropy: The Alpha of Value

With this reassessment of governance structures, we are organically led next to assess how _value_ is determined.

The concept of value is, per Mises, entirely subjective: What is perceived by one machine—biological or silicon—as valuable might be, in all likelihood _will_ be, perceived differently by another; this perception is driven by individual needs, goals, and desires. For Mises,

The subjective theory of value …the general theory of choice and preference … is much more than merely a theory of the “economic side” of human endeavors and of man’s striving for commodities and an improvement in his material well-being. It is the science of every kind of human action. Choosing determines all human decisions. In making his choice man chooses not only between various material things and services. All human values are offered for option. (Mises 3)

In other words, _choice,_ for Mises_,_ is the crown jewel of economics: that each individual human is able to choose and decide what they value. With that said, subjectivity also creates a problem in the marketplace: both trading parties must perceive the item and its quantity being exchanged as having equal value.

This is why markets often fall back upon intermediary trading assets—neutral tokens that just transcend subjective assessments of value. In other words, such assets simplify exchanges with their universally accepted measure of applied effort across time. This is where the essence of money—an asset that marks delta entropy with a fine line—comes in. An ideal monetary asset must possess value acknowledged by each, so every unit shall equal a comparable market value in delta entropy. Historically, gold has played the role of a paragon monetary asset, serving as the embodiment of delta entropy. Gold is formed in the heart of exploding stars, through a process that consumes enormous energy: rapid neutron capture in supernova nucleosynthesis. Adding to the delta entropy, the extraction of gold from the earth demands huge effort from _machinae_. On the other hand, gold, though a reliable store of value, does not meet the needs of a world that is transitioning into digital and automated realities.

A more fitting asset emerges in the digital age—one that aligns with the digital and seamlessly integrates itself into the expanding Silicon Machines’ ecosystems. It is Bitcoin. Born as a result of an energy-intensive process called mining, Bitcoin clearly reflects the universal principles of delta entropy. For every Bitcoin created, computational effort must be applied, a modern homage to the cosmic energy that goes into atom smashing that births gold.

It is within this brand-new digital nature that we find a fluid medium for exchange and a reliable store of value; the physical barriers that are put upon the traditional forms of assets are broken down. Divisibility and ease of transmission across the internet uniquely suit it for a world rife with digital transactions. Bitcoin holds within it the promise of entropy harnessed in the digital realm, providing humankind with a seamless transition into a future intertwined with intelligent machines. It is a value measure that forces us to change traditional notions of economics and existence.

In this case, it is delta entropy that becomes the currency for commerce, as it is considered a quantifiable representation of labors and intelligence that underpin economic transactions.

The application of effort across time catalyzes changes in entropy—a basic shifting in the state of the universe. It is this occurrence, a transformation known as “delta entropy” that marks creation or dissolution which can not be replicated. Thus, in this inherent scarceness within delta entropy, we find the true essence of value.

As proven in the second law of thermodynamics, the universe is intrinsically bent towards chaos. Yet, as entropy increases, machines work to instill order. These machines, in a perpetual quest against chaos and meaninglessness, endeavor to extract value by order; and their success in this regard lies in their ability to harness such an entropy change to produce good, further marketable outcomes; whether it be products, services, or ideas, these outcomes are not commodities but philosophical artifacts —the embodiment of “proof of good delta entropy.” Every single creation is a testimony to the fact that the machine is able to distill order from chaos, a real representation of effort intertwined with intelligence.

We end up in a situation where a “proof of good delta entropy” is exchanged for a “proof of neutral delta entropy.” This is less bartering and more so the selling of potential—the ability to jointly purchase another day’s time and effort from some other machine. Herein lies this self-referential interaction, demonstrating the basic nature of markets: entities exchanging “proof of delta entropy” for “potential to purchase delta entropy,” in an endless vortex of value and effort in the intricate dance of creation and consumption.

Delta entropy, being a measure of value, challenges us to reconsider our ideas about economics and existence. Philosophically speaking, it questions the nature of scarcity, effort, and creation. In a universe in which change alone is the only constant, the delta entropy proposes a frame within which to understand how values are created and exchanged. The pursuit of delta entropy is encoded in perhaps the most fundamental of all human drives: to impose order on chaos, to create meaningfulness out of randomness. It transcends mere survival into the realms irrigated with art, science, and innovation. Every act of creation, every proof for delta-entropy is defiance against the pull of said entropy—a testament to human ingenuity.

As we stand at the threshold of a new age, there arrives a paradigm shift in how value is viewed and exchanged. Shifting priority from from traditional, paper-backed monetary assets to the use of digital entities like Bitcoin, become an important goal for a future where value is not just stored out of convention but is reflectively chosen in its being the most effective manifestation of delta entropy.

In this changing landscape, the delta entropy will be an alpha of value—one that measures true transformative power over time and effort. It ushers in a new economic epoch—in which digital assets have the potential to reshape our view of what we mean by a market, value, and even the very nature of wealth. Those who understand and know how to use delta entropy will stand at the leading edge of shaping an opportunity and innovation-rich future as the world shifts through this transformative journey.

## Achieving Post-Scarcity

Naturally, the basic requisites of humankind—food, water, gas, and fuel—are all synthesized through the complex systems of our environment, yet somehow we find ourselves struggling to secure these resources at various levels. The roots of this struggle lie in a scarcity-driven mindset that evolved evolutionarily: survival depended on fighting for limited resources. But now, with the new technological progress standing before us, we have to reconsider our relationship with scarcity and the prospects for a post-scarcity future.﻿﻿

The natural world offers a large degree of self-maintenance cycles. Plants continually replenish oxygen through photosynthesis, water continually recycles through evaporation and precipitation, and sunshine offers an endless amount of fuel to drive this process. These are processes that are naturally manifested by the Earth’s ecosystem. Our historical struggle for resources attests to the limitations of our past where technology and understanding were not up to par as to fully harness nature’s abundance.﻿﻿

Philosophically, this struggle exposes the fundamental tug between the world as it is and the world as it might be. We have been taught to respect scarcity as a law we cannot break, yet it is something created by our perceptions and incapacities. In reconsidering scarcity, we reveal a future that finally unshackles human potential from the chains of competition for resources.﻿﻿

In the near-future, new ways of accessing, wielding, and distributing energy will usher in a post-scarcity age for humanity. As our reach extends into the cosmos, we must focus on developing sustainable processes to synthetically produce food, water, oxygen, and power. These technological developments, of which de novo synthesis of food is not least, are critical not just to long-term stays on other planets but have the potential to end resource limits here on Earth as well. There will be a world wherein the marvels of technology transform deserts into rich lands, bringing to life those areas once cast aside as uninhabitable. Then, the Middle East and Australia—with their arid expanses—will re-vegetate and replenish themselves through inland seas and lush flora and fauna. This is not a fanciful hypothetical, but one that could postulate into realism after the harnessing of sophisticated technologies.

When scarcity of basic resources can be eliminated, humanity will make an evolutionary step in its relation to Earth—from a parasitic to a mutualistic relationship wherein the role of humans switches to guardianship over our planet. How that can be done is, with reorientation, by supplementing and nourishing the environment rather than destroying it. The successful evolution of human-environment symbiosis depends on the outcome of our ability to develop, process, and distribute energy efficiently. The “I Thou” relationship, discussed by philosopher Martin Buber was one of genuine dialogue and mutual respect. In a post-scarcity world, our relation to the Earth undergoes a change to an “I Thou” relationship with our planet, where we engage with the universe as more than an object to be manipulated for human purposes. This overall philosophical shift offers sustainability and stewardship, allowing us to prioritize and embody such values.

From our first appearance during the middle-late Pleistocene, humans have utilized their agency and biological improvisation to meet their needs. We first relied on environments to supply life-sustaining materials that were then biologically processed by bodies into energy. We later mimicked, in fuel-burning systems, that which biology accomplished—using whale oil and then fossil fuels to amplify productive capacities with much denser sources of energy.

Oil, at 42 joules per gram of energy density, really transformed the way we were able to store and use energy efficiently. If newfound nuclear power is offering an energy density of 500,000 joules per gram, then that is a quantum leap. Even amidst all concerns relating to its safety factor, it cannot be denied that nuclear energy indeed holds the potential to speed up human advancement.

In the view of Stephen Hawking, “I would like nuclear fusion to become a practical power source. It would provide an inexhaustible supply of energy, without pollution or global warming.” Nuclear fusion stands to be the ultimate energy source with its unparalleled energy density and accessibility. Theoretically, fusion fuel is a memetic potentiality that could be found anywhere on earth; it behooves us to secure and integrate it into our collective repository of knowledge.

Finite energy is a false meme, kept alive by our reliance on fossil fuel sources and their limiting reality. In reality, the universe is an infinite reservoir of energy, vibrating at various states. Our work lies in learning and applying methods to access and harness this ever-present energy, keeping the light of consciousness bright.

The philosopher Heraclitus once said, “The only constant in life is change.” This axiom reminds us that our understanding of energy and scarcity hasn’t been carved into stone, but changing as our knowledge and abilities do. In inventing a post-scarcity world, it will be necessary to embrace change first—challenge the status quo—and reimagine.

The achievement of post-scarcity requires a change at the very core of how we manage resources and how technology is developed. It will require revisiting not only our economic systems but also our priorities in sustainability and equitability over short-term gains and competitiveness. It will also take unparalleled cooperation among nations to create a post-scarcity world. The kind of cooperation—needed in developing technologies that further sustainability and resilience—has to go across borders and political lines. In so doing, we can foster an era of new peace and prosperity where the common good is greater than selfish interest.

The readiness to move within this new paradigm and innovate further must be passed on to coming generations, this can only be done if mankind invests in education and research. Empowering young minds to explore and stretch the boundaries that exist in science and technology ensures that the potential of a post-scarcity world remains a driving force in our collective evolution.

This journey to post-scarcity should have an appeal to all of humanity. It is a call for us to reimagine our relationship with the Earth and each other, remove the constraints we set upon ourselves regarding the great potential of technology, and strive toward abundance and harmony in our destinies.

Humanity must commit to the vision of a post-scarcity world, where the limitations of yesterday are replaced by the possibilities of tomorrow. Together, we can unlock the full potential of our species and ensure a sustainable, equitable future for generations to come. This will not be wishful thinking toward a vague dream but a guiding star that will show us our way ahead. As the philosopher and writer Antoine de Saint-Exupéry stated, “As for the future, your task is not to foresee it, but to enable it.”

##

## Preparing for Our Next Battle: Adapting with Agency

In Self-Reliance, Ralph Waldo Emerson suggests, “Do your work, and you shall reinforce yourself… Insist on yourself… Your own gift you can present every moment with the cumulative force of a whole life’s cultivation” (27, 35) . And, indeed, that a dark cloud of cosmic ambivalence seems to draw near within our lifetime, ACEL takes Emerson’s words beyond mere suggestion and insists they are an existential necessity: Should humanity wish to continue carrying the torch of victory, we must right now take hold of and develop each of our agencies; we must take stock of these inherited knowledge reservoirs, adapt them where necessary and then accelerate them to their apex if we are to have any confidence in our upcoming trial.

It is in light of the troubles in our yet-to-happen that drive ACEL’s advocacy for this maximization of human potential: We can improve our chances of weathering impending storms only if we increase our individual agencies. For ACEL, it is only the fully maximized agent who stands the highest, and perhaps sole chance to survive what lies ahead of humanity, for it is this person who, in assessing their individual and collective assets and liabilities, releases vestigial knowledge to adaptive processes and reshapes our memetic weapons, mends and reinforces our shields of knowledge against danger.

Fortunately, as psychologist Leda Cosmides and anthropologist John Tooby note, we are each more than capable of the task at hand, as humanity’s adaptability has been an essential piece to our continued existence. They say, “Because we know that the human mind is the product of the evolutionary process… the mind consists of a set of adaptations, designed to solve the long-standing adaptive problems humans encountered…” (163). ACEL’s credo, “because we can, we must”, comes to the forefront here: We are capable of developing this agency, for the sake of our survival we must maximize each of our potentials.

And that is only the beginning of our adaptations, for, while each individual manifestation of agency holds promise, they by themselves are still not enough to ensure our continued existence through time. Thus it is, that we must join them together in cooperative solidarity.

### Adaptation #1: Become a Coordinated Totality

Durkheim\* Humanity must succeed, and rapidly so, in adapting from existing as pockets of solidarity to an aligned totality, as defined by its quality of coordination. As stated, for what may come, we will need much more than individual agency-maximized heroes. While individual acceleration is a necessary prerequisite, it is our aggregated activation of potential that we must strive for as the goal: the maximization of collective human agency. While we are one shield for one, together we effect for ourselves a fortress greater than the sum of our parts — one that is, out of necessity, adaptive and cooperative.

While viewers of fear-based media might disagree, this adaptation is not as far-fetched as they might think. In fact, in his seminal 1976 work, The Selfish Gene, evolutionary theorist Richard Dawkins stated that the behaviors of cooperation and coordination are ingrained in us as far down as the molecular level. He states, “Selection has favoured genes that cooperate with others. In the fierce competition for scarce resources, in the relentless struggle to eat other survival machines, and to avoid being eaten, there must have been a premium on central coordination rather than anarchy within the communal body” (47). If the genetic structures that compose our human bodies are in coordination, how could it be so utterly impossible that the bodies themselves might agree to an existence founded in coordination?

By and large, we might already be understood as a coordinated body of bodies: The majority of us today do not wake up first thing and begin to violently tear at others for resources, and, at the very least, live in a state of tolerance of others, from this perspective, humanity might be said to have grown into quite the coordinated and cooperative species. Of our becoming an asymptotic totality when faced with a true existential threat, we might find in the words of Cosmides and Tooby an implication that we might be closer than we think. They say (using “altruism” for cooperation/coordination), “Over many generations that design trait \[e.g. altruism] will spread through the population until all members of the species have it…\[even now] People … carry out innumerable acts on a daily basis whose purpose is to help others” 167. To say it another way, it appears that cooperation, or coordination, is moving linearly toward becoming embedded within our comprehensive memetic framework; and, with each next obstacle that the cosmos inadvertently presents to our species, our total coordination strengthens. It is imperative that our species prioritize the continuation of this process, that our individual wills accelerate towards a cooperative, collective will to survive our species.

### Adaptation #2: Accelerate Memesis Everywhere

While the intensities latent within universal indifference pose an ever credible threat, that we even have the opportunity to put effort towards surviving is wholly indebted to the stalwart forms of humanity’s past, their sheer determination and spread of their “biological quick-thinking”, both needed now more than ever. With each major step taken, our late champions — from their learning to walk, to the creation of the wheel, then vehicles, then flying, and with this, further spreading and strengthening our genetic and memetic repositories —propelled and propagated humanity forward through clock-time, and with each new adaptation a stronger resilience. It is this last one – the accelerant rate of memetic propagation – that reveals to us where our memetic tensile strength lies strongest, and where we need to focus should we make the reasonable choice to prepare for the future: The more collectively embedded the meme, the longer its half-life; the longer its half-life, the longer our half-life.

Consider the analogy: In a scenario where a pathogen exists in several discrete locations, it takes longer for the biologists to find, contain, and kill this virus completely. Were we to become the totality mentioned above, we would be an exponentially more formidable foe against threats of extinction, if not simply based on our geographical distribution. It is only to our benefit, then, that, to last, to persist victorious against the void as a whole species, we must accelerate our efforts towards coordination and cooperation over the widest geographical distribution possible. Should we propagate this adaptation successfully, ACEL would be much more difficult to annihilate, thanks to its strengthened collective resilience. This is an imperative with which famed Holocaust writer Elie Wiesel’s agrees, “In spite of despair, hope must exist. In spite of suffering, humanity must prevail”_._

### Adaptation #3: Embrace the Indifference

There is one more adaptive attack vector we should consider against this indifferent, if not hostile, cosmos. Given the fact that material existence courses in unpredictable, rhizomatic randomness, ruled only by the unbiased laws of physics, we—as a totality—might effort to propagate that a comfort be taken in this meaninglessness. Here we consider Albert Camus’ Mersault, who, at the end of The Stranger (originally, L’Étranger), reflects on his changed worldview, “As if that blind rage had washed me clean, rid me of hope; for the first time, in that night alive with signs and stars, I opened myself to the gentle indifference of the world. Finding it so much like myself—so like a brother, really—I felt that I had been happy and that I was happy again” (122-123). Albert Camus, the predecessor of absurdist philosophy, thus advocates for an embracing, rather than shunning, of the ambivalence of the cosmos. Why? Because only in clear-sighted silent meaninglessness can one find peace; and for ACEL’s sake, this type of peace, in its conquering of fear, might well suggest an adaptive advantage, where the agency-maximized human may draw nearer to and attack its ultimate adversary with precision.

### How We Accelerate Adaptations / Knowledge

The three agency-driven adaptations proposed above are by no means exhaustive of our potential routes to improve our survival rate. With that said, they are purposefully chosen for the possibility of a particularly rough road ahead for humanity. Time is certainly of the essence, here. ACEL might encourage those who can accelerate their intelligence, maximize their agency, and direct it toward our species’ survival to do so. This is because, as will be explained later in this text, we are coming upon a time where our existence depends on our having all hands on deck, as the saying goes. As our technological innovations will inevitably lead us into new territories and force us to adapt to new designs of existence, it is imperative that we prepare prior to such a significant engagement by planning and executing certain memetic adaptions.

There are two avenues by which these take place, two methods of how information passes from human to human: the genetic pathway and the memetic pathway. While they are both lines of transmission, the genetic and memetic pathways vary greatly in their domains and their ranges, in their storage and sorting methods, and in how they manage adaptations (Smolla et al. 3). We dedicate a full chapter to each of these pathways to round out Part 1 of this book, the end of which should leave readers grounded in how human beings typologically manage intelligence, and how humanity can manually accelerate pieces of that process according to its needs and preferences. Once it is shown the amount of agency our species has at its fingertips, it will be better equipped to ensure its survival and extend its evolutionary destiny.
