---
layout:
  title:
    visible: true
  description:
    visible: false
  tableOfContents:
    visible: true
  outline:
    visible: true
  pagination:
    visible: true
---

# Chapter 1: Humanity, Time, & Family

### Taking the Longview on '_Humanity_'

If it is not common knowledge, it is certainly an intuitive pancultural truth that words are perceived differently to different individuals—just as well for groups, regions, disciplines, etc. Such is the fluid and dislocating nature of language: "No engineer can make the "means"–the sign–and the "end"–meaning–become self identical" (Derrida, _Grammatology_ xix)). For just this reason, it is the business of philosophy to require of the philosopher a defining of their terms, to uphold as sacred the asymptotic pursuit of precision and clarity in meaning; this, a standard, lest the logos of so many arguments fall asunder, and swaths of hypotheses end in a premature "_proven faulty_". Now, if it may be so bold to say, this text considers itself in the business of philosophy; and so here at the outset we must take valiant steps to get very clear on, not what a term means fundamentally, but rather its _emic_ meaning; that is, its meaning _according to ACEL_. By these efforts, not only will the discrete points to come be immediate in grasp, but also will the full scope of the following chapters work come into view at the right time.&#x20;

As we know from the introduction that this books purpose, its _raison d'être_, remains steadfastly focused on shouldering all of humanity through to its longest possible extension. But, what exactly does _humanity_ mean in the context of ACEL? As we'll see, it is far from resembling convention. Thus, as a necessary requisite to maintain a clear, cohesive, and consistent logos, a brief contextual dive into ACEL's rendering of this term must be taken. (note: throughout the book, _humanity_ is at times used interchangeably with other terms, e.g. humankind; humans; human beings; our species; we; us; biological machines. In certain contexts, however, these terms will be deployed using their conventional meanings. The context will clarify which is being used.).

The fact is that there are countless extant interpretations of the term '_humanity_' throughout the phenomenal world; almost certainly more whose half-lives have extinguished. Most of today's will signify a group of alive human beings, but who are understood as such only by their having met some approved checklist of biological and sociocultural attributes. Given that this sterile 'bodily gaze' is our _defining_ "competition", we might allow a sigh of relief, in that our burden-by-quantity—while it does nothing for a reader's confusion upon arrival—is only that, and need not bog us down with too much fret. This is for the simple fact that ACEL's novelty in its own construal of the term is so conceptually individuated, so imaginatively distant from the normative, standardized, biologically-flat rendering, that its containments will be nigh hard to get unstuck.&#x20;

While we tease at the expense of what we might call '_policy-bodies_' that compose modernity's humanity, this is not to say that ACEL stands in opposition to scientific views of the body: Even in the formation of its very own concept did it justify that's constitution against the backdrops of multiple scientific disciplines—e.g., paleoanthropology, neuroanthropology, sociology, history, evolutionary biology, molecular biology, geography, neurology, etc. (Marks 6). Plainly stated, this philosophical exercise dismisses no biological facts; shirks no law of science nor physics—quite the opposite: It is only thanks to scientific progress, particularly those advancements made in the biological sciences over the last two centuries, that ACEL holds a faith its _humanity_ ought, into more eras to come, extend.

And extend _humanity_ does, with regard to ACEL's definitional rendering: Here, we might recall the spectrum of 'temporal relevance' with which the cartographer began to trace his observation—curiously, in mapping the evolution of agency, he put his pencil to paper at a point _before_ the beginning of biological life; more, the line on the page he extended far beyond our present day, for far more eras than _Homo sapiens_ have _lived Earth_. This is the mapper's observation of the evolution of agency—at once, his tracing of _humanity_.&#x20;

To draw the intended meaning from this metaphor, we see that, per the mapper's tracing, he notices a pattern: where there is _agency_, there is _humanity_—this is true _independent_ _of_ _the presence of a Homo sapien_. And here arrives ACEL's definition of 'humanity': For ACEL, _any expression of agency—_ever to have manifest, currently manifest, will one day be manifest—is included within, _as_ 'humanity'. In this term's deployment throughout this book, then, its reference will signify _every step of evolution_ _that has produced_, in some relation, _today's extant human being_; its meaning is the full ancestry that was developmental to and inclusive of the modern _Homo sapien_ (and its sociocultural environment). Every past and present genetic ancestor of ours, every future descendent per agency-relation, is part of this notion.

But, how can this be? To be sure, theoretical models can elasticize however they please, depending on the criterion and the constraint set. This is true even if the previous model is increased by at least 13,000 times—_in both directions_—which is precisely what ACEL's defining of _humanity_ has done, and why this section is titled, "longview".&#x20;

But even this incognizable temporal relevance notwithstanding, it must must be explained as to why these wildly elongated extensions are both of them capped off, bookended, by _nonliving entities_. While as mind-pretzeling as it may seem to suggest that certain non-living things have at one time possessed agency—more, that in their _not-life_ _created life_; more still, they they are part and parcel to the biological humanity of which, until now, we have been the sole proprietor—the claim is nevertheless  based on decades of sound empirical research, specifically that which was carried out in the name of 'The RNA World Hypothesis'. While this origins-of-life theory is treated proper in the next chapter, here we can say that their resulting evidences suggest, more or less definitively, that certain prebiotic (i.e. nonliving) structures were in fact the _active_ _creators of all biological life_ as we know it (this is discussed more in chapter 2). It is in this way that our cartographer connects his line from, basically, a 4-billion year old microscopic rock (because no genes) to extant human beings, to you and to me. Surely, if they did create the beginning of all biological life, then—aside from the fact that Aristotle was a lot less wrong in espousing that 'spontaneous life' was a thing, and we should apologize—there really is no way out from our relation to them, after all.&#x20;

One down, one to go; for, just as with our antecedents, so, too, with our consequents: What nonbiological iterations of agency are to become emergent in the abyss of _not-yet_? This a much simpler inquiry to solve: These nonbiological beings will most certainly be the silicon machines, or, artificially intelligent beings, whose relevance to the overall picture of this book and its inherent philosophy cannot be overstated. This will be shown in due time.

It seem ACEL's geneless "bookends" will hold its theoretical housing after all, for these nonbiological agencies certainly are valid in their being placed on either end of the spectrum—that spectrum we used to call '_our_ _humanity_'. In our moving through this process to define _humanity_, then, this term has taken on the the novel qualities of _inclusivity_, _relationality_, and _generativity_. all of which are connected by the manifest hand of _agency_.

It is a defining of species veritably unprecedented in scope, one which could effectively mark a definitive turn in evolution studies, should its theoretical "swap-out" between speciating qualifiers—from genetic to memetic; from genes to agency—be of theoretical value, amalgamating as it does beings and _nonbeings_ come and gone under a collective grouping_._&#x20;

Thus do the days seem over when we human beings could call humanity "our species" without giving pause (granted, even we have not yet shaken the residual habit; we do this numerous times throughout this book). Perhaps there is a gem to be learned from it, perhaps that we are, in fact, not at the center and apex of everything about the cosmic unfolding; that there is something of which we are part, as opposed to otherwise; something more important than us, after all.

### Adjusting to ACEL '_Time_'

Much as with the redefining of '_humanity_' do we need to also devote a brief space to '_time_'; or, to be more faithful to ACEL's philosophical conception of the term, the _process of time,_ or _the unfolding of time_. This is simply born of the fact that, insofar as its purpose is to facilitate our survival and evolution—two concepts that require _duration_ for their emergence—there is no portion of the philosophical system contained herein that does _not_ touch the general process of manifesting phenomenal existence through a period, that of enduring emergences across a temporal span. on every scale does its philosophical world unceasingly engage with temporal continuity; its existence is tied to it.&#x20;

For these reasons do we need to orient readers to the mode of ACEL's _time-world_, for it makes its presence known, without exaggeration, on most if not all pages of this book. And when so, it is handled with the dexterity of an expert. This is seen in its redefining of 'humanity'; it is in the ease and repose with which it engages with the theoretical pliability of _time_; how it employs its malleability, stretches it out, bends it according to its will. And, should there be any doubt, ACEL most certainly remains perpetually embedded in its 'longview', relaxed and settled therein, as if lounging in a very long hammock. While a fun image, this implies a more sober responsibility on the reader's part to keep in mind that _all_ considerations of time in the text will be arriving from a gaze several billion years unfolded, on both sides. Admittedly, this requires some getting used to. In its own ways, the book itself efforts to deliver true-to-model propoundings in the utmost clarity; in this assignment, it works to avoid reifying the loaded linearity and misleading segmentation of the terms _past_ and _future_, opting instead for phrases such as _the already-happened, before-this, not-yet, the unfolding-now, yet-to-come_, etc. For, _Time_, for ACEL, is phenomenal; we are not clocks and do not experience the world as such. Sure, our cartographer traced over the process of an evolution, but it would be mistaken here to take him to plotting starting and end points; it is merely that he sees and follows the emergent assemblages and their relations as they unfold—each thing a manifest-rising, a perpetual bubbling up into materiality; or, it doesn't. And surviving ends.&#x20;

Just considering the term _survival_ generally, isolated for a moment from all contexts of this book, do we see it is a time-based action, one that is _an unfolding-through._ We might define it as such: a having-already-emerged manifest existence—individual or collective but carries intentionality of maximum continuity—perpetuating itself, possibly with some attendant difficulty, _through_ or _across_ some temporal plane. We see here that, attendant with survival, is the subtle connotation of _effort_, or _challenge_, or _conscious persistence_, and its successful execution is the delivery to, or arrival of, some intentional maximum output of existence. Truly, one cannot be said to be "surviving" if they are not enacting _some_ perpetuation of themselves—otherwise, wouldn't this agent not still be alive? Even when euphemistically deployed in conversation, as in "I'm surviving...", it is said—always attendant with audible sigh—by folks who, embedded as they as in an affective relation to their closer temporal surroundings, are presently, manifestly _moving through_ trying times. By this we see that ACEL's 'noble purpose', far from one simple, flat unrolling, is, much as it carries countless emergent existences on its back in the name of _survival_, brimming over with affect, this to be treated in due time. First, _time_.&#x20;

To most efficiently and effectively render ACEL's baseline temporal gaze, this book will do well to briefly deploy to this end some of history's most incisive contributors to the philosophy of time. Once we are all situated with a clear, well-defined framing—one that boasts easy and quick recall, we hope—of how ACEL engages with the process of time, our defining of terms will be complete.&#x20;

#### "The Pebble Left on the Beach..."

ACEL's approach to _time_ is absolutely philosophical in nature, activating as it does the processual comportments of Henri Bergson's _durée_ and Alfred North Whitehead's _fluency_ of time. To be sure, this effort to frame ACEL's theoretical approach to time here will do no such thing as devolve into an academic exposition of process philosophy, but instead will place the virtue of expediency as its utmost priority. Fortunately, Bergson gives us an affective, illustrative entry point to begin our defining of time per ACEL; and indeed, it seems the most incisive is also the most quixotic, as Bergson reflects, "... the pebble left on the beach displays the form of the wave that brought it there" (Bergson x). His meaning is self-evident: _all manifestations of time hold all other manifestations of time._ This notion of time, then, defined as it is by _inclusivity_, is directly reminiscent of ACEL's humanity.&#x20;

So, too, is it also reminiscent, by its nature of opposition to conventional understandings. This representation of time by Bergson is far from the mechanistic tickings of a clock, positing as they do those methodical, discontinuous demarcations between one discrete moment and all other moments (which are just as discrete). Certainly, with each tick, with each tock, the clock hand shouts that the past is immediately and forever cut off from the observable present moment; that some repository of moments builds at an untouchable distance behind the present; that _back there_ is _not here_. If ACEL actively championed clock-time, its 'humanity' would immediately break into pieces. &#x20;

Of course, ACEL does understand the necessity of discrete measurement in evolutionary biology. It accedes that empirical findings do not come about by the philosophical gaze. Still, does not the basic premise of evolution concede that the "truth is that we change without ceasing, and that the state itself is nothing but change" (Bergson 2)? Darwin himself states in _On the Origin of Species_, that "Embryology rises greatly in interest, when we look at the embryo as a picture, more or less obscured, of the progenitor, either in its adult or larval state, of all the members of the same great class" (Darwin 490). Without question, he is suggesting here that we look at each living organism as a manifest picture of its _whole past_—not just sometimes, but each time. For Darwin, then, champion of evolution as he is, the past _lived_ _in_ the present, literally, not figuratively—but, if the past does indeed live in the present, if it manifestly exists in the present, does this not imply that, the past _is_, in fact, the present?&#x20;

Indeed, it seems so; otherwise, how are we to make sense of the fact that over 90% of human DNA carries no functional role (University of Oxford)? Does that not betray that we human beings are mostly, in all literality, walking fossils; molecular, evolutionary blueprints carrying the literal past not just _in_ us, but _as_ us? It is here we might, by way of this intimate dynamic between _humanity_ and _time_, begin to open the door of ACEL's philosophical world and gaze upon it through its own eyes.&#x20;

What is seen—of course by still-squinting, acclimating eyes—appears to be that of an 'humanity-as-continuum', whose orientation to another 'time-as-continuum' runs parallel, overlayed, superimposed upon, only naturally so, and so making them out to almost look as one thing: They present both one a fluent, transitional, relative _collapse_ of multiplicitous _endurings_ or _potentialities_ into a unified, observable, transitive theater. Indeed, humanity and time appear indistinct in their shape and in their movement. They each are _generative_ in activity and moved by a perpetual formation, or emergence; Whitehead calls this "_concrescence_", which, on the surface, presents phenomenologically comparable to the mundane household 'moment'—anything but (Whitehead 211). Bergson clarifies this distinction by saying, "our duration is not merely one instant replacing another; if it were, there would never be anything but the present—no prolonging of the past into the actual, no evolution, no concrete duration. Duration is the continuous progress of the past which gnaws into the future and which swells as it advances" (Bergson 4-5). We would be remiss here if we did not acknowledge the concordance held between Bergson's sentiment and these lines from Whitman's "Song of Myself":

```
Urge and urge and urge,
Always the procreant urge of the world.

Out of the dimness opposite equals advance, always substance and increase, always sex,
Always a knit of identity, always distinction, always a breed of life. (24)
```

In this model, there exists no demarcation; the line in the sand is brushed away with the sweep of a foot, and in immediate swell the past rushes up to meet and to grapple for becoming the next _unfolding-now_. In so doing, the past regains an equal and utmost importance as that which is no longer past, to which it rushes to greet. This allows _humanity_ to take form as ACEL proffers it; in this, we also have an incipient model for illustrating the dynamic between humanity and time: We recall here that humanity is defined by three fundamental qualities: its _inclusivity_, its _relationality_, and its _generativity_. We have also drawn out the argument that humanity more or less _resides in_ time; and that that they are fundamentally _one and the same in manifest shape_. From this, we gather that _time_, also, must also be _inclusive_, _relational_, and _generative_. Now, we might ask ourselves: which relationship is this, in life? Of what is this a model? Considering that time is generative of humanity; it includes it within itself, literally; they move through their existences continuing their relation: We conclude that it recalls none other than that of a mother and child; and here, especially insofar as that humanity _took form_, then we might confidently offer the metaphor: _Time is the womb of_ ACEL.&#x20;

#### The Ubiquity of Time-Based Systems

Framing a philosophical system around temporality, or at least ensuring it is given due attention, is nothing new. In fact, it seems by default these systems deploy this "practice"—that of accounting for the movement through periods—penetrates the foundations upon which most any system is built; it is virtually impossible to find a sociocultural structure that does not attend to time in some respect—all of them each, whether explicitly or implicitly, leave dedicated space for addressing time, whether cultures—e.g., Egyptian, Buddhist, Mayan; thinkers—e.g., Hegel, Whitehead, Darwin; or disciplines—e.g., evolutionary biology, thermodynamics, phenomenology (these categories are but representative of the broader domain of sociocultural systems that account in some way for 'time'; their specific examples serve to show the breadth of scale by which human beings are nigh pressed to live _outside of time_). While is true that, during and through the long duration of ourselves, that the concept, the engagement with time has countless times been reimagined, repurposed, and refashioned. These are not the same as being abandoned altogether; and it appears this latter, with regard to the available visible systems within our cultural repository, has yet to lay down its first emergence striation. In short, we can't shake time, quite possibly because we still don't know what to do with it. It's certainly not certain whether or not we should wish to create said system, one absolutely outside of the consideration of time.

#### Scaling Temporal Relevance

Of the myriad approaches we humans have taken to make sense of time, to order to, to put it in certain boxes only for it to pop out just after, one positive to come out of all order-forming trial and errors, is that humans have an enormous amount of data added to our cultural repository—that is, humanity's enormous stockpile of memetically information it has learned and acquired over its entire _durée_ (soon this book will, after its treatment on memetic transference, begin calling this archive of knowledge our 'memetic repository'). This is data we have ever available to us, and will be of central importance to our methodology. Suffice to say now, with regard to the study of our formation of time systems, one meaningful inconsistency between these numerous models comes to light: this is the scale, or the length (in the language of classical 'time') to which each structure extends _temporal relevance_. In keeping with the logos of linearity that most modern models of time deploy—i.e. forward it future; back is past—this notion of _temporal relevance_ is the measurement, determined in "length", of _how far_ the system extends time (into their future and their past) to the degree that the respective culture considers useful, or necessary, or logical, with respect to its own theoretical or philosophical world. For instance, the standardized Gregorian calendar maps out a highly stratified system of days, months, and years, all of which are oriented to date of the birth of Jesus Christ (incorrect dates per modern scholarship notwithstanding). In this way, the temporal relevance of Christianity, of by and large the western world in its entire modernity, (via this calendar that itself was made public in 1582) is roughly  2,025 years per the Gregorian calendar year; such is our meaning of this term.

While a number of modern members of our species could not name another time system if they tried, it is forgivable, give the absolute and centuries-long dominance of the Gregorian time system. However, it is undoubtedly true that there have been many other temporal systems throughout humanity's long road to here, many other philosophical worlds and many other cultural systems that have oriented their time-worlds much differently than the high-structure of the modern world, much as it is rooted in Christian contexts. An example of one such variant, highly edifying to a point to come, lies in the philosophical world of ancient China. In this historical cultural setting, whether one was Confucian, or Daoist, or some manifestation of the multiplicitous folk religions, within all of these lines existed the notion of an 'immortal sage'. While to the culturally jaded etic gaze of the sociologist this abstract figure presents as none much more than an ethical guide; the precise formation of this figure, its abilities, features, especially its signification to the broader culture's sense of _temporal relevance_, lends a great deal of insight into the present discussion. Latent within this "immortal sage" is it betrayed that a vastly contrastive temporal system to modernity's Gregorian calendar was at play for the early Chinese; in its opening us to early China's temporal system, we are able to draw from this some incisive theoretical insights: insofar as early China's cultural world held open a dedicated space for the existence this "immortal sage"—not just as some abstract god, but as a material fact, one that had  just as much right to exist as they mere mortals (far more, it seems, in fact)—that this being existed in the realm of manifest reality, opened to its constituents a much more intimate, familiarized, even mundane relationship with the measurement of an 'infinite time' (whatever that may have meant within that culture); a temporal relevance that extended to 'infinity' was on the tongue far more in early China than it is today, much fresher in their cultural repository than ours and understood as a fact. In essence, "the infinite"  lived a much more active life on-the-ground, was far more _temporally relevant_ than today, in no small way due to the culture holding open even more room for these "immortal sages", as they were not only immortal, but in their being so, spent some of their time on earth, possessing the ability to, in fact, walk on the ground; that is to say, any given human being just walking down the street—_you_ might see one, even talk to one—direct, intimate, diametrical relevance was there with 'infinity' in, not flesh, but in the possibility that that was a moment that could happen, on any day at any time.&#x20;

The Gregorian calendar, on the other hand, with its highly stratified temporal world, does not leave so much room for an immortal sage, seeing as, with the calendar, his age may be scientifically plotted. Just so, the modern systems of science, much as it would need empirical proof of immortality, and also finally religion, disavowing any successful leap to perfection that is not on their watch, thrice do combine together to effectively preclude _even an attempt_ to cogitate a meeting between oneself and an immortal being(—to be sure, this is not suggesting that some "Calendar police" will come arrest you for thinking outside of the box; what it is suggesting is that, by the silent strength of these systematized cultural anchors, it is less than effortless to enter other modes of temporal relevance). Additionally, there is no active or regular admonition against immortality on the part of these systems so as to affect in you an aversion to such contemplations; yet, we are arrested just the same (in the sense of a halting or a freezing); so, what _does_ inhibit the modern western mind from entering into an affective, familiar, ordinary contemplation of 'a walking, talking infinite being'? This is because, simply, this time-quantity is, quite literally, _outside of the scope of our cultural systems' temporal relevance_, in very much a literal sense (i.e. _infinity_ is not on the calendar). It is worth nothing that, were it to _actually_ happen, that is, were immortal sages proven to exist, it would effectively and immediately topple all three of these western powers, for this dialectic between two _systems of differing temporal relevance_ would have been proven more accurate in favor of the sages. &#x20;

The challenge highlight by these immortal sages was drawn out in full so as to highlight the dialectic that emerges when the lines of two systems with differing temporal relevances collide, or pass over, or brush sides. While also leading to internal conflict, this is due to the dual-containment aspect of cultural systems, in that a culture is that which contains the system, as well as that by which it allows itself (both the culture and the system; for when a culture's structural values are injected into a given system, the system thereby become an extension of the culture) to be contained by the system. This book does not have the time nor the space to deliver any exposition on the sociological defense mechanisms with regard to cultural time systems. Suffice it to say that, as ACEL can, by its delivery above, be seen to be on the cusp of offering a cultural system with a very pronounced temporality, it is wise to take note of cultural responses to new time systems.   &#x20;

### Half-Life

Whether genetic or memetic, intelligence has an intrinsic "half-life"; knowledge or instructions are only helpful for a particular duration of time, before they begin losing their functionality. They fade over time, to give way to new ideas and innovations, but still manage to leave traces of their existence.&#x20;

Earlier genetic instructions in human DNA demonstrate one of the most fundamental principles regarding the "half-life" of intelligence: helpful information tends to endure longer over time. Our DNA serves as somewhat of an encyclopedia of life's history retaining instructions that have made it through millennia by being necessary for survival. Much like the roots of a tree anchoring it deep in the earth, these genetic instructions can be seen as the very foundation from which humanity grew.&#x20;

Yet, much like the leaves that remain on trees, some of these traits become useless with the changing environment and evolving species, slowly fading into insignificance—leaving remnants behind. Regardless, these remnants survive, creating a legacy that hints about previous times. For example, the gene for synthesizing vitamin C in humans is now a pseudogene; and although it is no longer functional, it's presence reminds one of an evolutionary journey that began in a world full of dietary sources of vitamin C.&#x20;

**memes intro?**

Memes—the cultural equivalent of genes—also have a "half-life". These cultural artifacts define our understanding of the world and ourselves: art, music, mathematics, science, and religion. Similarly to genes, they are also subject to pressure by utility or relevance.&#x20;

**good ideas**

Take the work of Beethoven for example, although composed centuries ago, it poses a half-life far beyond the fleeting bits that make up most of today's popular music. Old scriptures such as Norse mythology and ancient philosophies, while their direct influence may vary, are permanently etched in some way in our collective consciousness. They are a base from which modern thought is launched—much like ancient ruins that give an inkling of the great civilizations of previous times.&#x20;

**wrong ideas**

The journey of human advancement is marked by the replacement of outdated memes with more advanced ones. The once-dominant belief that the Earth was flat, or that the Sun revolved around the Earth, illustrates the short "half-life" of erroneous ideas. These beliefs were supplanted by more accurate models of the universe, driven by technological advancements—like telescopes—which allowed for precise observations.&#x20;

**good but evolved into outdated ideas**

Towering figures in the annals of scientific thought, such as Sir Isaac Newton and Albert Einstein, contributed memes of extraordinary potency. Newton's three laws of motion and the theory of relativity proposed by Einstein have endured for centuries; and yet, as our methods of observation grow in sophistication, we may discover these "half-life" rich memetic gifts but mere approximations to the truths we've attributed them, and so lay the ground for new, more precise paradigms,

**shifting role, we are outdated by silicon**

As we strive to further the boundaries of knowledge, humans must accept that there will probably come a time when we may not have the tools or insight to decode the universe wholly. To accomplish such a feat, we may have to leave this task up to advanced silicon-based machines with stronger sensors and higher processing power. Advancements such as Artificial Intelligence could be utilized to unearth truths that would allow us to revision our memetic repository. Our role may shift from primary creators of memes to custodians or interpreters for the insights these machines provide us.

**purpose to survive**,&#x20;

Ultimately, the true purpose of humanity is to yield memes and genes that survive and prevail. Our current struggles to amass wealth, status, or power mean nothing if they don't help in contributing to our repositories. Thus, individuals who perceive value accumulation as their sole purpose are bound to stagnate in life, likely shutting themselves out of fear. The ones who choose to spread potent memes and genes embrace fluidity and adaptions. Those are the Acels--always moving, constantly pivoting, constantly influencing.&#x20;

**powerful ideas is what matters**

The Acels are the agents of change; knowing full well that the real wealth lies in the ability to create and share powerful ideas. They are not attached or held back by their resources but utilize them in a manner that bring innovation and leverage. Their wealth is fluid; it flows effortlessly through time, effort, value, and intelligence.&#x20;

**back to dark ages?**

Humanity has accumulated knowledge in the form of memes, shaping them into delicate tapestries woven through centuries of progress and culture. These repositories are at risk, vulnerable to both terrestrial and extra terrestrial threats. A single coronal mass ejection from the sun contains more mass than the entire human population combined. It is composed of powerful solar radiation that disrupts electrical grids and communication networks. In short, it could plunge us back to the Industrial Age, wiping out at least a century of technological and social progress.

### The Parent-Child Relationship

### The Role of Parents

Parents play the most pivotal role in this evolutionary journey. By fusing their genetic material, they create offspring with an entirely new set of genetic information. All endowed with evolutionary "entropy," the next generation forms a pool for adaptation and survival. These fusions – genetic variations, are vital to evolutionary progress (Provine).&#x20;

Even beyond genetics, a child inherits a vast memetic repository---an archive of condensed cultural wisdom and knowledge-based insights. With every new generation, this repository grows, and thus, any new generation is better-tooled and better-informed than the last.&#x20;

Therefore, the responsibility of the parents is extended, they are more than just genetic sources. The begetter is under obligation to endow their children with at least a basic amount of memetic knowledge, which the children will use to adapt, respond, and navigate through their environment. Their dependence on their parents for memes is provisional, the the offspring will eventually outpace their parents in expanding their repository, progressing and achieving higher levels than their predecessors, in terms of genetic and memetic intelligence -- such a process of progression is vital to the evolutionary enhancement of the human species.&#x20;

In modern society, children who deviate from the norm are often held back and hindered. They are labelled and put on a spectrum (IQ, ADHD, autism) in an effort to control and manage anything that is seen as not usual. This sort of labelling is counter-productive and cruel, kids are diagnosed and given medication, which holds back their development. Studies have shown that children with an ADHD diagnosis have developmental delays of up to three years compared to their peers. (Thomas Armstrong, The Myth of the ADHD Child)

Diagnostic tests, such as the IQ test, provide narrow perspectives on intelligence. Even though they measure certain cognitive abilities, they do not have the capacity to analyze the full range of human intelligence. As a society, instead of confining ourselves to such definitions, we should celebrate intelligence as the ability to survive the universe's adversity --- no matter how; the ultimate objective of life is survival, and we should view intelligence through that lens. Intelligence comes in many forms, it is too versatile to keep within our definitions. For example, a crocodile can survive on a desert island with less effort than a human, who is more intelligent here?

These children, with remarkably extensive intelligence, have high-functioning abilities. Society has a responsibility to magnify and embolden their capacities, instead of subjecting them to narrow definitions. An education system has to be adopted that respects different types of intelligences, contribution to human progress is done collectively by every human on the intelligence spectrum. The diversity in human experiences and the difference in how individuals think should not be seen as a negative, but recognized for the strength that it is. Realizing intellectual diversity and allowing it to flourish allows for a stronger, more resilient society.

* FUSE The parents get to fuse their genetic sequences together, add some entropy to encourage evolutionary discovery and produce a second-generation entity.&#x20;
* GENETIC This entity is injected with a set of genetic instructions that are statistically more likely for them to survive and adapt to universal adversity than their parents. The child is more capable than the parent.&#x20;
* LARGER REPOSITORY Not only that, but the child gets access to an ever larger memetic repository than the parent, that uncovers more of the universe.
* MEMESIS The role of a Parent is to deliver a baseline of memetic knowledge to the Child to accelerate them to a point at which they know enough about their modern environment to safely express agency whilst they explore the universe.
* EXCEED The Parent must recognise that the Child is fully dependent on them for genes and memes, until a point at which they morph into their Peers, and ultimately, exceed them in capability. Children should always be more capable and complex than their parents, because of the progress of Humanity itself.&#x20;
* Parents do not own their Children, they can only campaign them with memes, until they can independently establish their own framework of understanding.&#x20;
* CHILDREN THAT DONT SURPASS A child that does not exceed their Parent in either Genetic and Memetic intelligence, whilst evolutionary a disadvantage, is still critical to humanity itself. All of humanity, up and down the stepladder of progress, is a celebration of agency. At any point on the stepladder of intelligence, the future of humanity can continue to evolve, from a starting point of  any creature.&#x20;
* DIAGNOSES Placing individuals on a spectrum of intelligence (IQ) and labelling them (eg ADHD, Autistic, Asbergers) is not only a disservice to them and a form of control, but also anti-humanity itself. Every biological machine is part of humanity, inside a continuum of Complexity vs Fragility. The more complex a creature is, the more fragile it is, and the more sensitive to adversity.&#x20;
* Labelling a high-functioning child as ADHD (and the rest) is both cruel and a disservice to their capabilities. By putting them in box, they can be “controlled” because those doing the labelling are simply manifesting their own fears. Oppression and Control is always down out of fear.&#x20;
* A high-functioning child has potentially more energy and more capability to express agency whilst exhibiting intelligence. They should be amplified and supported.&#x20;
* MEDICATING Medicating a high-functioning child is even crueller, seeking to decelerate their energy and output because it seems chaotic to the observer. Once again it is a form of control - trying to fit the high-functioning child in a box of average.&#x20;
* Every permutation of humanity should be free to be, to explore the universe and seek to explain it
* Each biological machine, through the propagation of genes and through the agented dissemination of their knowledge, contributes to our existential extension of endeavor of advancing and expanding our repositories. &#x20;



