---
layout:
  title:
    visible: false
  description:
    visible: false
  tableOfContents:
    visible: true
  outline:
    visible: true
  pagination:
    visible: true
---

# I. Biological Knowledge is a Road Plodded Further Backward than Forward

## The Evolution of Our Intuitive Sense of _Heredity_

### 10,000 Years of Selective Breeding: **First Evidences of **_**Deliberate**_** Biological Transfer**

While the term _heredity_ might be unfamiliar to some, that living organisms possess and pass on certain traits to their offspring, is not: According to Daniel Zohary, Late Professor Emeritus at the University of Jerusalem, the human species has held _some intuitive semblance of knowledge_ heredity for at least "10,500-10,100 years" (1). This comes from Zohary's studies of fossilized vegetable seeds, the likes of emmer wheat and other cereals and legumes, e.g., lentils and peas, that were domesticated by "a string of Early Pre-Pottery Neolithic B (PPNB) farming villages that developed in south-west Asia” (1). Evidently, that these ten-millennia-old farming communities _did_ domesticate certain plants for food suggests that they not only knew that it was possible, they also knew _how_ to do so_._

### A Necessary Tamping of Scientific Prowess&#x20;

It is difficult to determine just how _scientific—_how precise, even intentional—these first executions of selective breeding were. That is, we do not know if these early farmers kept records or logs of data, if they altered decisions based on past results, or if they were even operating under false premises. Per the latter, there is nothing to suggest against their having some Lamarckian\*-type belief attendant with their plant-domestication practices (Jean-Baptiste Lamarck was a well known late-18th, early 19th-century thinker who incorrectly postulated that organisms assimilated into themselves experience-based attributes, and that these were then transferrable to offspring) (Lamarck 280-81).&#x20;

But it is not these early farmers' scientific expertise that is important; it is whether or not these fossilized seeds provide a nominal quanta of evidence that their handlers were, to some nonzero degree, cognizant, not of the _mechanisms_ of biological transference, but merely of the _fact_ of transference. That the seeds betray multi-season training, this suggest that already in our species' first agricultural practices do we have the first record of cognitive attunement to inter-organism data transfer (Zohary et al. 1).&#x20;

### The Acceleration of Agricultural Practice&#x20;

We need not even make a guess as to whether or not the phenomenon of agriculture took off those ten-thousand years ago; we might simply look in our refrigerator to find the answer. In fact, the propagation of farming practices accelerated with near immediacy; of this, Zohary says, "\[a] most remarkable feature of south-west Asian Neolithic agriculture is its rapid expansion soon after establishment in the nuclear area" (4). Emergent with agriculture was the coeval domestication of farm animals, namely, sheep and goats. These joint life-optimizing seeds of farming practices and animal husbandry could, quite soon after their inception, be found leagues away and in variegated biospheres, where distinctive techniques and training were necessarily developed and made to accommodate foreign environments (Zohary 4). As time unfolded, this diasporic aggregate of farming practice and animal husbandry only grew—this with respect to not only geographical distribution, but also output, technological improvement, scientific knowledge, and so on.

### Textual History of this Intuitive Knowledge

And yet, just as agriculture was becoming the bedrock of human civilization itself, it seems that only a handful of compendiums dedicated to this field were penned into the annals of history. This holds true until nearly the 19th century. Nevertheless, the few we are privy to each offer great insight into their emic culture’s understanding of heredity and its concomitant practices. For instance, there is the first century Roman, Lucius Columella, writer of _Res Rustica_, Ancient Rome's only comprehensive farming manual. This tome "contains instructions for selecting, breeding, and rearing cattle, horses, and mules," thereby showing that Ancient Rome did in fact possess a methodology for the selective breeding of farm animals (Ash 17). About one millennium later, we have Ibn al-Awwam's _Kitāb al-Filāḥa_, an exhaustive medieval anthology of expert agricultural practices. It details, in 12th century Arabic, numerous methods of animal husbandry, how soil health and manure affect plant life and heredity, even how one may graft disparately-sourced olives into a new breed (Al Awam). Lastly, there is Robert Bakewell, a mid-18th century pioneer in livestock breeding, whose methods, while unethical, were of weighted influence to Charles Darwin and his development of the theory of natural selection (Wood).

Taking these three texts as parts of a whole, we are able to trace the agricultural knowledge base through three of the most intellectually enlightened civilizations of the past two millennia — from Ancient Rome, to the Islamic Golden Age, to the height of the British Empire (prior to the dawn of genetics). What comes into view is a well-defined thread of interest in and understanding of heredity, particularly as it pertains to the selective breeding of farm animals. While this topic was a relatively well-understood practice by even the time of Columella, what is particularly impressive here is that these figures, as well as their collective cultures, were able to improve the precision of this practice while entirely lacking the scientific basis of how heredity actually yields certain outcomes. Truly, it could be said that not one person on the planet knew _why_ or _how_ this phenomenon of selective breeding actually worked, on a scientific level—that is, until Gregor Mendel.

## Mendel, and the Dawn & Evolution of Genetics

While humans have for over ten millennia possessed some degree of awareness that parents transfer information to their offspring, it wasn't until the turn of the 20th century, with the _re-_discovery of Gregor Mendel's 1860's research on pea plants, that our species would enter a new arena of biological awareness.

### Mendel, Ignored & Rediscovered

Although Mendel delivered his paper, "Experiments in Plant Hybridization", to the Brünn National History Society in 1865, the scientific import of the findings therein was not acknowledged nor accepted until well after his 1884 passing. Historian of biology Peter Bowler suggests this delay of widespread adoption of Mendelian heredity was "partly because Mendel had written in an obscure local journal and partly because the excitement generated by Darwin's theory had kept attention focused on outdated models" (Bowler 3). Eventually, though, as William Bateson—the first major champion of Mendel's laws—noted in his 1909 book _Mendel's Principles of Heredity_, "In the spring of \[1900] there appeared, within a few weeks of each other, the three papers of de Vries, Correns, and Tschermak, giving the substance of Mendel's long-forgotten treatise. Each of these three writers was able from his own experience to confirm Mendel's conclusions, and to extend them to other cases. There could therefore, from the first, be no question as to the truth of the facts" (Bateson 7).&#x20;

But, what were the facts, exactly? What did Mendel do, and discover? Briefly, Mendel, with well-defined parameters and meticulous documentation, had conducted a two-year empirical analysis in which he crossbred twenty-two pea plants and followed seven defined traits over successive generations. Mendel himself states, "The object of the experiment was to observe these variations in the case of each pair of differentiating characters, and to deduce the law according to which they appear in successive generations" (Mendel 4). From these experiments Mendel found that "the hybrid–character resembles that of one of the parental forms so closely that the other either escapes observation completely or cannot be detected with certainty... those characters which are transmitted entire, or almost unchanged in the hybridization, and therefore in themselves constitute the characters of the hybrid, are termed the _dominant_, and those which become latent in the process _recessive_" (Mendel 7). In other words, Mendel not only discovered that there were definitive patterns in the way parental traits present in offspring, he also introduced a new framework to the heredity model, whereby traits carry either _dominant_ or _recessive_ pieces of data—these "pieces of data" Danish botanist Wilhelm Johannsen would in 1909 term _genes_ (Roll-Hansen 201). In short, Mendel, by advancing this new framework for heredity, laid the foundation for what was to become the field of _genetics_, a term Bateson himself would publicly coin in 1906.

### Genetics: The New Kid on the Science Block

With Mendel's conclusions laying the foundation for the science of heredity, the 20th century exploded with output in the biological sciences. For instance, in addition to the _gene_, Johannsen also delivered the concepts of the _genotype_ and _phenotype_, which helped to clarify "the distinction between hereditary potential and the concrete characters" (Roll-Hansen 201). Thomas H. Morgan, in his 1915 text _The Mechanism of Mendelian Heredity_, lays out the findings of his study on a particular type of fruit fly, the conclusions of which exhibit "chromosomes as the material basis for inheritance" (Morgan viii). That is to say that Morgan successfully links the theoretical activity of genes to the physical nature of chromosomes; this study more or less establishes the field of genetics.&#x20;

### Modern Synthesis

More effort was put forth still into synthesizing Mendel's heredity with Darwin's still very fresh theory of evolution. William Bateson was at the forefront of this mission (termed in 1942 "modern synthesis"), saying in _The Origin and Scope of Genetics_, "Darwin, it was, who first showed us that the species have a history that can be read at all. If in the new reading of that history, there be found departures from the text laid down in his first recension, it is not to his fearless spirit that they will bring dismay" (Bateson 47). Geneticist and evolutionary biologist Theodore Dobzhansky took up Bateson's torch; and, in his 1937 work, _Genetics and the Origin of Species_, he laid out the challenges that both had yet to overcome:

> As pointed out by Darwin, any coherent attempt to understand the mechanisms of evolution must start with an investigation of the sources of hereditary variation. But the mode of their origin, and the cause of their appearance remained obscure to Darwin... A solution, though a partial one only, of the problem of the origin of hereditary variation has been arrived at... due to the application of the methods of modern genetics. It is now clear that gene mutations and structural and numerical chromosome changes are the principal sources of variation... The origin of hereditary variations is, however, only a part of the mechanism of evolution. If we possessed a complete knowledge of the physiological causes producing gene mutations and chromosomal changes, as well as a knowledge of the rates with which these changes arise, there would still remain much to be learned about evolution. (Dobzhansky 118-19)

### The Double-Helix

Less than two decades after Dobzhansky's rather bleak appraisal of the state of both evolution theory and genetics, James Watson and Francis Crick in 1953 published a brief one page article elucidating their discovery of the double helix structure of DNA, ushering into our scientific repository the era of molecular biology (Crick and Watson ). Since then, this and many other branches of science have been exploding with interest and advancements. One of the many major research milestones in molecular biology was only just completed two years ago, after 32 years of effort: In 1990, The United States initiated the Human Genome Project, an international effort to sequence the entirety of the human genome, and what is now understood to be "the largest single undertaking in the history of biological science" (Battelle Technology Partnership Practice). Of course, with the scaling that technology has seen in recent years, this claim will, much like a gene, be transcribed and translated to new projects; indeed, it already has.&#x20;

## A Prefatory Side Note on _Time_

### "The Pebble Left on the Beach..."

This book, much as it attends to the concept of evolution, finds much, if not most, of its discursive treatments necessarily embedded within the respect of _time_. With that said, it is not a _clock-time_ by which evolution is most often framed; ACEL's approach to _time_ is absolutely philosophical in nature, activating as it does the processual comportments of Henri Bergson's _durée_ and Alfred North Whitehead's _fluency_ of time. Indeed, for ACEL, "... the pebble left on the beach displays the form of the wave that brought it there;" in other words, ACEL's evolution is holistic: _all manifestations of time hold all other manifestations of time_ (Bergson x). Of course, the necessity of discrete measurement in evolutionary biology holds little room open for such temporal musings. For this reason, there exists a tension within ACEL's thought system, one that needs massaging into reconciliation at this present time.

As we know, much of this book is focused on what is yet to come for us biological machines_._ Just as well, for, in time's being a continuous, dynamic, unified _flow_, ACEL is also just as interested in the many _transitioning becomings_ that led biological life to its collective, _unfolding-now_—Whitehead frames this _past-in-present,_ or _past-as-present_ even_,_ as "the origination of the present in conformity with the 'power' of the past" (Whitehead 210). This nuanced framing of "the past" is not borrowed from Whitehead and Bergson for the sake of being pedantic; rather, ACEL's holistic understanding of humanity—its encompassing of all agency through all observable time—requires just this type of framing. As we know, this opposes both the understanding of _humanity_ as _homo sapien sapiens_ only, as well as the classical understanding of _time_, which is perhaps most manifest in the mechanisms of a clock, positing as it does a methodical, discontinuous demarcation between one discrete moment and all other moments (which are just as discrete). Certainly, with each tick, the clock hand shouts that the past is immediately and forever cut off from the observable present moment; that some repository of moments builds at an untouchable distance behind the present; that _back there_ is _not here_.&#x20;

### Darwin, Evolution, & their Quiet History of Holism

But doesn't the basic premise of evolution concede that the "truth is that we change without ceasing, and that the state itself is nothing but change" (Bergson 2)? Darwin himself states in _On the Origin of Species_, that "\[e]mbryology rises greatly in interest, when we look at the embryo as a picture, more or less obscured, of the progenitor, either in its adult or larval state, of all the members of the same great class" (Darwin 490). Without question, he is suggesting here that we look at each living organism as a manifest picture of its _whole past_[—not just sometimes, but each time](#user-content-fn-1)[^1]; for Darwin, the past _lived_ _in_ the present, literally—does that not imply that, perhaps, the past _is_ the present? This is ACEL's perspective.

_Evolution_, then, is, like _time,_ a continuum-proper for ACEL: They are both one a fluent, transitional, relative _collapse_ of multiplicitous _endurings_ or _potentialities_ into a unified, observable, transitive theater. _Evolution_ and _time_ are thus indistinct in their shape and in their movement. This perpetual _formation_ of theirs Whitehead calls "_concrescence_", which is theoretically comparable to the household _moment_; but in abstraction, utterly distinct (Whitehead 211). Bergson clarifies this distinction by saying, "our duration is not merely one instant replacing another; if it were, there would never be anything but the present—no prolonging of the past into the actual, no evolution, no concrete duration. Duration is the continuous progress of the past which gnaws into the future and which swells as it advances" (Bergson 4-5). In this model, there exists no demarcation; the line in the sand is brushed away with the sweep of a foot, and immediately the past rushes up to meet and join the _unfolding-now_. In so doing, _the past_ regains an equal and utmost importance as that to which it rushes to greet.

True, were evolutionary biology, and science generally, to adhere _only_ to this abstract notion of time as it is given by Bergson and Whitehead, and throw away the clock completely, the structural integrity of all experiments would fall asunder. ACEL knows this; it understands the clock's place in science, assuredly; we need lines by which to measure things. Still, ACEL, it takes advantage of its not being a technical science, and, like Darwin, takes a wide-angle, longview of _time_; in doing so, meaning across the continuum is equalized, balanced. It _refills_, in a way, the presence that _before_ held when it was _now_, and fills _next_ with a presence it will soon hold—in this way, _before_ is as important as _now_, which is as important as _next_.

### Disinviting the Metaphysical in Process Philosophy

Furthermore, while ACEL does see a rising harmony between evolutionary biology and process philosophy, it sees this as possible only insofar as are disinvited certain problematic aspects of the latter—namely, its attendant vitalist and metaphysical components. An example where ACEL would parse its adoptions of Bergson's thought can be highlighted in the following quote:

> Where, then, does the vital principle o the individual begin or end? Gradually we shall be carried further and further back, up to the individual’s remotest ancestors : we shall find him solidary with each of them, solidary with that little mass of proto-plasmic jelly which is probably at the root of the genealogical tree of life. Being, to a certain extent, one with this primitive ancestor, he is also solidary with all that descends from the ancestor in divergent directions. In this sense each individual may be said to remain united with the totality of living beings by invisible bonds" (Bergson 45-6).&#x20;

This statement is, in many ways, utterly similar to Darwin's given above, and appreciated for such part of it. Unfortunately, Bergson veers from this grounded understanding of evolution with his injection into the model _élan vital_, an invisible, metaphysical, vital force of life. ACEL reserves the right to nod to the scientific here, while leaving behind the vitalism within sentiment (it does this also with Whitehead's metaphysical leanings). With such prudence, ACEL is able to fashion a processual notion of time that is more attuned to evolutionary biology, absent as it is of the metaphysical.&#x20;

This perhaps overextended clarification of ACEL's theoretical orientation to _time_ is given only in hopes that it might more smoothly open the door to the following discussion, much as it will challenge a traditional understanding of when, where, and how _life_ began. That is to say, the following two origin-of-life stories (and their synthesis) necessitate a thinker's suspension of—or, at the very least, a shifting of—clock-time, as they not only sweep away the line in the sand that demarcates past from present, they also sweep away the line between _life_ and _not-life_. This latter piece speaks to ACEL's holistic sense of humanity, and thus is the source of their inclusion in this book. &#x20;

## Two Origin(s-of-Life) Stories: 'The Primordial Soup Theory' and 'The RNA World Hypothesis'

### Disclaimer for the Scientific World

It would be well to state here that ACEL makes no claim to the scientific fact of the following thought-experiments; it merely entertains, out of an authentic care for our evolutionary _yet-to-come_, some theoretical possibilities that might explain our _where-from_.&#x20;

### A Brief History of 'Origin-of-Life' Studies

The interest in the origins of life is anything but a recent phenomenon. Alexander Oparin, progenitor of 'The Primordial Soup' theory (the first to be discussed below) said of this, "History shows that the problem of the emergence of life has fascinated the human mind from time immemorial. There has been no religious or philosophic system and no great thinker that has not devoted serious attention to this problem" (Oparin ix). He is not wrong: in fact, this question predates even Aristotle (who, of course, also broached this subject in his _Generation of Animals_). The Greek philosopher Anaximander, of the 6th c. BCE, appears to be the first to posit a theory on this subject of origins, which, according to historian Andrew Gregory, was inspired by water-to-land metamorphosis of the Caddis fly (Gregory rejects the common reading of Anaximander suggesting we evolved from "fish-people" (Gregory 29). While Aristotle offered his own thoughts on evolution and origins some 200 years later (he rejected gradualism and advocated for spontaneous generation), public interest in and inquiry into this topic died off for the next two millennia; no anomaly, this massive gap in studies of not just _origin_ theories, but all scientific inquiry, is attributable to Christianity, whose challengers—especially those providing  alternative explanations to life outside of divine origins—were considered heretical, and dealt with as such.&#x20;

It was only with the arrival of the Enlightenment Period that interest (or at least finally the willingness to publicly express interest) in naturalistic and scientific phenomena returned. This included a revival in the circulation of _origin-of-life_ theories; and, while these first contributions in almost two thousand years were largely speculative—as in the work of Jean-Baptiste Lamarck; Georges-Louis Leclerc, Comte de Buffon; and Charles Darwin's grandfather, Erasmus Darwin—this might be forgiven in light of the fact that the field was a bit rusty, having only carried out "science" in the name of theology; neither did these brave first efforts yet possess the scientific method. Despite these deficits, these Enlightenment-era efforts laid the groundwork for the next wave of biologists, which, as Ernst Mayr notes, in the introduction to his 1942 work _Systematics and the Origin of Species_, was, flood-like:&#x20;

> For more than a century the field of biology was so extensive and growing so rapidly that no single investigator, no matter how broad might be his grasp, could keep abreast of all of the developments in all the numerous branches. The response of biology to this challenge was a subdivision of the general field into many disciplines, each endowed with its own materials, methods, and techniques... Inevitably, second subdivisions have arisen in the course of time. (Ernst vii)

One such branch to which Mayr was referring was evolutionary biology, within which was held a subdivision: _origins-of-life_. It is from this specialized research nook that two particularly compelling—and still enduring to this day—hypotheses were, after successful testing, drawn forth into the public eye. They have both over the years garnered much attention, both by specialists and the general public (even being featured in textbooks), and for good reason: they might, in fact, in some form or another, approach degrees of accuracy in explaining how life, e.g., self-replicating cells, originally came about. These hypotheses are none other than the 'Primordial Soup Theory' that put forth in the 1920s by Soviet biochemist Alexander Oparin; and the 'RNA World Hypothesis', begun in the 1960s by Francis Crick (co-discoverer of the 'double-helix'), Leslie Orgel, and Carl Woese. A name that must also be mentioned here is Stanley Miller, who plays a critical role to each hypothesis, as will be shown.&#x20;

These inspired scientists have each, both independently and jointly, sought to find the structural primitives of biological life itself. They have made lasting headway in this regard; even in the past few years new research has strengthened and evolved these theories. Of course, here is not the place for discussing the depths of these theories' scientific intricacies; we encourage you to use the bibliography section at the back of this book as a starting point to do your own research on the matter. Nevertheless, this book, and the mission it holds, will benefit from brief overviews of each of these theories' main ideas, insofar as they help to color in the early timeline for ACEL, thereby providing a clearer evolutionary orientation from which its may be said to to begin its unfolding.

### The 'Primordial Soup' Theory

#### Setting the Scene

Visually, the ‘primordial soup’ presents as thus: in the incipient period of Earth's formation, long before organisms or cells came to manifest in its cosmic reality, there existed a reducing (i.e. nonoxidized) atmosphere; a gaseous oceanic chaos; a turbulent, amorphous churning of substances. These, according to Miller and Urey, the creators and deployers of their famous 1953 Miller-Urey Experiment— an empirical, small-scale testing of Oparin's 'primordial soup', which found the theory plausible—consisted of  "... hydrogen, methane, nitrogen, and ammonia; smaller amounts of carbon dioxide and carbon monoxide; and possibly small amounts of other substances such as higher hydrocarbons, hydrogen sulfide, and phosphine" (Miller and Urey 245). They note these "were probably not present in equilibrium concentrations, but compounds which are thermodynamically very unstable in this highly reducing atmosphere" (245). This vaporous cloud, which took the simultaneous form of both atmosphere and ocean, was in constant, chemical activation due to ultraviolet light, incessant electrical storms "electric discharges, such as lightning and corona charges from pointed objects", and, to a lesser degree, volcanos and radiation (247-8).&#x20;

#### Sticky Molecules

Without going into excessive detail, it suffices to say that this "soup" of ceaseless chemical reactions would, over time, develop organic molecules the likes of amino acids, sugars, fatty acids and lipids, hydrocarbons, formaldehyde, hydrogen cyanide, and (possibly) nucleotides (Oparin 319). These hapless organic compounds were created, destroyed, recreated, altered, pulled apart, smashed together all accelerating this ball of constant organic intensity. Eventually—a very long eventually ("ten to several hundred million years") (Deamer and Dworkin 2)—more complex, and stronger compounds would polymerize and hold their structural integrity, or not; but eventually, some would, for good. These polymers would lead to the first structural outlines of macromolecules necessary for the creation of cell-based life (Deamer and Dworkin 2); this, as we know, did indeed occur—we might take our own existence as evidence of this. However, it this was not a direct jump to genetic life, as Miller and Urey note:&#x20;

> Oparin (1) does not view the first organism as a polynucleotide capable of self-duplication but, rather, as a coacervate colloid which accumulates proteins and other compounds from the environment, grows in size, and then splits into two or more fragments, which repeat the process. The coacervate would presumably develop the ability to split into fragments which are very similar in composition and structure, and eventually a genetic apparatus would be incorporated which would make very accurate duplicates. (Miller and Urey 250)

Thus it was at this point that somehow, by some stroke of luck, chance hit, and a coacervate (i.e. water-like droplet) split in just such a way that would become the first self-replicating entity; and the first genetic code popped into the domain of Earth.&#x20;

#### As Luck Would Have It

Such was the "primordial soup", the environment that, according to Oparin, gave rise to the birth of the very first biological machine: this machine, the smallest and first manifestation of _order_ that, against all odds, grew out of an amorphous, Earth-sized chaos. In this way, matter would begin to organize itself in more complex ways, and the blind forces of chemistry would recede to give the stage to the new, directed processes of biological forms (Lazcano & Miller 1994).

### The 'RNA World Hypothesis'

#### The Double (Functioning) Agent

Leading away from the macroscopic view of 'The Primordial Soup Theory', this second _origins_ story, focusing as it does on a _molecular agent_, a _mechanistic catalyst_ from which DNA possibly generated, requires first a brief look into DNA's microscopic dependencies that suggest it had a structural template off of which to take form.&#x20;

We know that DNA must carry out certain functions—the storage of information, self-replication, and catalytic tasks—to sustain life. Of these three, it is able to store information independently; that is, it needs nothing other than itself to store genetic information. However, as for its other _two functions_, DNA requires proteins _external to itself_; that is, it is unable to self-replicate without these enzymes, nor is it able to catalyze reactions by itself—in our terms, it needs "food". But herein lies the major problem for _origins-of-life_ researchers: in primitive earth models, these proteins _do not exist_, meaning there would be no support for a self-replicating or catalytic DNA.

But surely, _something_ had to wiggle DNA into existence at some point. Shrum notes what is needed for this to take place:

> Understanding the origin of cellular life on Earth requires the discovery of plausible pathways for the transition from complex prebiotic chemistry to simple biology, defined as the emergence of chemical assemblies capable of Darwinian evolution. We have proposed that a simple primitive cell, or protocell, would consist of two key components: a protocell membrane that defines a spatially localized compartment, and an informational polymer that allows for the replication and inheritance of functional information.

This is where RNA becomes of great interest: Under certain conditions, a particular type of RNA molecule, the ribozyme, is in fact capable of carrying out all three of DNA's life-sustaining functions: information storage, self-replication, and catalysis; but more than this, it is able to do this _entirely independently of any external proteins whatsoever._ That is to say, in conducive settings, this type of RNA, one that meets all of Schrum's criteria, needs no outside "food" to perform these tasks; it is a complete system with dual-functionality (three if you count storage).&#x20;

#### More DNA-like than DNA

Needless to say, these biologists found striking parallels in this molecule that so resembled the operational features of DNA; it was even _more DNA-like than DNA itself_, for it could perform all the functions of DNA _entirely_ _without the proteins that DNA required, that did not exist in primitive Earth_. Such is why "The general notion of an 'RNA world' is that, in the early development of life on the Earth, genetic continuity was assured by the replication of RNA, and RNA molecules were the chief agents of catalytic function" (Joyce and Szostak 1). Indeed, once they discovered "that RNA could behave in a Darwinian manner in the absence of cells," and that it "has both a genotype and a phenotype," these scientists began to see this structure as a "plausible precursor to a much more complex system" (Higgs and Lehman 1). Walter Gilbert stated back in 1986, the same year he coined 'The RNA World':

> Until recently, when one thought of the varied molecular processes at the origin of life, one imagined that the first self-replicating systems consisted of both RNA and protein... Now it seems possible that the informational and catalytic properties of these two components may be combined in a single molecular species... And if there are activities among these RNA enzymes, or ribozymes, that can cataly\[z]e the synthesis of a new RNA molecule from precursors and an RNA template, then there is no need for protein enzymes at the beginning of evolution. One can contemplate an RNA World, containing only RNA molecules that serve to cataly\[z]e the synthesis of themselves (Gilbert 618)

Experiments pertaining to this hypothesis continue still today: Just in 2022, "Researchers at the University of Tokyo had been for the first time been able to create an RNA molecule that replicates, diversifies, and develops complexity, following Darwinian evolution. This has provided the first empirical evidence that simple biological molecules can lead to the emergence of complex lifelike systems" (University of Tokyo). This catalytic nature of RNA was also corroborated by the University of Chicago just earlier this year (Papastavrou et al.).&#x20;

Now the leading origin-of-life theory, the 'RNA World Hypothesis' might confidently claim "that there was a period of time in primitive Earth’s history—about 4 billion years ago—when the primary living substance was RNA or something chemically similar... \[that it] carried out most of the information processing and metabolic transformations needed for biology to emerge from chemistry" (Higgs and Lehman 1). Truly, if these ribozymes should be found to wield these same agencies within the true conditions that defined early Earth, then it is highly likely that RNA did in fact serve as the material, infrastructural template from which biological life was birthed.&#x20;

### Synthesizing The Two: The RNA Agent in Early Earth's Soup?

To this last point, it is in fact quite possible that 'The Primordial Soup Theory' and 'The RNA World Hypothesis' are no more than two early explorations, of varying scales and foci, of the same picture. That is to say, they might well belong to one broader origins theory that has yet to see its shape fully defined. That they share a strong root premise that life originated from prebiotic substances; that DNA itself was not _always_ the the champion of life's story; indeed, that _life_ was born of, or came from, _not-life_—is highly suggestive of compatibility. Schrum's encapsulation of both betrays further linkage:

> The emergence of the first cells on the early Earth was the culmination of a long history of prior chemical and geophysical processes. Although recognizing the many gaps in our knowledge of prebiotic chemistry and the early planetary setting in which life emerged, we will assume for the purpose of this review that the requisite chemical building blocks were available, in appropriate environmental settings. (Schrum et al. 1)&#x20;

So, too, does Orgel move through a very similar line of thought, where informational deficits within one of the theories immediately and directly affects the success of the other's deployment:&#x20;

> The demonstration that ribosomal peptide synthesis is a ribozome-catalyzed reaction makes it almost certain that there was once an RNA World. The central problem for origin-of-life studies, therefore, is to understand how a protein-free world became established on primitive Earth. (Orgel 99)

Gilbert's language is also suggestive of containing both theories, "The first stage of evolution proceeds, then, by RNA molecules performing the catalytic activities necessary to assemble themselves from a nucleotide soup" (618).&#x20;

It is likely that this consonance between the two hypotheses is most optimally displayed by the efforts contained within the text, _The Origins of Life on Earth_, by Stanley Miller and Leslie Orgel. More or less carrying out just this mission of creating a broader framework that contains both theories, and within this, contains one theory within the other, this book devotes itself to how the DNA precursors as found in 'The RNA World' might arrive and evolve within the primitive Earth conditions as they were posited in 'The Primordial Soup Theory'. In other words, Miller and Orgel make valiant strides within the argument that the self-replicating nature of RNA developed out of none other than the 'primordial soup'.&#x20;

Aristotle was, to no surprise, not as far off with spontaneous generation as one might have thought.&#x20;

### Implications of These Findings&#x20;

The monumental implications of the possible, even probable, truth of these theories can be challenging to fathom at first. What they imply, though, among other worldview-changing intimations about _life_ itself, is that not only are _biological_ systems privy to Darwinian evolution, but that _prebiotic_ systems can be as well. It is more or less confirmed now that _pre-life_, given enough time and with the appropriate circumstances, can potentially evolve into _life_. To put this another way, certain abiotic molecules can, in conducive conditions, may evolve into self-replicating, catalytic polymers that could then become informational molecules.&#x20;

Taking the above findings into consideration, the classical understanding of the origins of life, where single-celled organisms develop in complexity over time, requires strong adjustment, as this picture no longer represents with certainty an accurate portrayal of the origins of early life. While true in and of itself, that single-celled organisms _can_ develop in complexity over time, nuance requires that we now consider _catalytic RNA molecules_ as _first_ replicators. Even more fascinating is that these pre-genetic structures seem to replicate _more_ when they _cooperate_ with one another; that is, when they express altruism and defy the traditional view of natural selection (i.e. that _selfishness_ and _competition_ "_should_" be selected for and _altruism_ selected against), they ironically _cheat_ the universe at life (Higgs and Lehman 6).

## Evolution of the First Organisms

It is from without of these theoretical possibilities that life, as we ordinarily know it—that is, typical biological organisms possessing this our own and familiar genetic pathway—began on Earth around 3.5 billion years ago. These were single-celled prokaryotes (e.g. cells without a nucleus) that held sole evolutionary domain of Earth for the next 1.5 billion years or so. While impossibly basic, these structures of biological life during this time were still able to discover, learn from, and adapt to their harsh environments. The survivors were those who developed resilience to their environmental adversities. Eventually single-celled eukaryotes (i.e. cells _with_ a nucleus) emerged, who, over the next billion years, learned how to further accelerate their evolution: sexual reproduction. Attendant with a second sample in the genetic sequence (via sexual reproduction) was _noise_ and complexity. This diversification would elevate the organism's resilience and stress responses to their environment, having as they had more genetic code from which to charge adaptations. As simplicity gave way, first to greater complexity, it soon fell to the others most optimally suited to use the available resources on the youthful Earth (Margulis 1998).

To little surprise, once this "noise" was added, life spread with an unyielding vigor. These early biological machines, under the imperative of the basic drives to survive and reproduce, took off on a path of uninterrupted adaptation and diversification (Lenton & Watson 2011). Indeed, not long after the "invention" of sex—e.g., between 200 and 600 million years ago—a new evolution would occur: the _busiest_ single-celled protists would eventually evolve into _multicellular_ eukaryotes (Ratcliff, Denison, Borrello, and Travisano 1596). These substantive moves made by these protists, sexually inspired as they were, actionably commenced the rapid jump to multicellularity, and might ought be applauded in gratitude. For, as the emergence of sexual reproduction accelerated and begot _noisier_ and _noisier_ multicellular structures, the universe's genetic repository blossomed as a fountain in all directions, with new organisms arriving and developing new and creative ways to survive and reproduce. Of this, Ratcliff summarizes:

> The evolution of multicellularity was transformative for life on earth. In addition to larger size, multicellularity increased biological complexity through the formation of new biological structures. For example, multicellular organisms have evolved sophisticated, higher-level functionality via cooperation among component cells with complementary behaviors. (Ratcliff et al. 1596)

He is not wrong. Without exaggeration, the emergence of so many new multicellular biological machines effectually reformed the typography, even the atmosphere of the planet. Falkowski states that&#x20;

> because of the rise and death of large land plants that were the forerunners of modern trees, the concentration of oxygen in Earth’s atmosphere 350 million years ago was about 35%—or about 67% more than at present. What was the consequence? The rise in atmospheric oxygen led to a massive invasion of land by animals from the sea. Worms, crustaceans, snails, and animals with backbones all successfully crawled up and colonized the new landscape. (Falkowski 141)

The ceaseless imperative of survival and replication had begun and has to this day continued, unfolding a still-gushing fountain that now boasts self-reflective beings to consider this all (Jablonka & Lamb 253).&#x20;

On this initial genetic leap from from single-cell to multi-cell organisms, which took place following the inauguration of Earth as a sex-positive planet, University of Minnesota Ecology professors William Ratcliff, R. Denison, Mark Borrello, and Michael Travisano claim that while the timespan leading up to this evolutionary jump  took billions of years, "the first crucial steps in the transition from unicellularity to multicellularity can evolve remarkably quickly under appropriate selective conditions" (Ratcliff et al 1600). Ratcliff et al. remark that this stagnation and quick burst of progress is actually customary to biological evolution, noting, "The fossil record shows that long periods of stasis are often punctuated by bursts of rapid evolution, presumably due to shifts in selective conditions and dramatic evolutionary responses" (Ratcliff 1600).

Much is owed to these tiny multicellular organisms that seemed to intentionally combine genetic intelligences in order add more and more genetic flavor, and thereby resilience, to the collective genetic repository. In so doing, they would accelerate the amount of mutations that would not just _emerge_, but _persist_, even _prosper_. It could not have been otherwise, that multicellular organisms emerged and persisted without these protists "wiggling" genetic diversity into existence. Certainly still, an innumerable amount of organisms had to have emerged _without_ prospering due to a lack of sufficient genetic diversity. This is a necessary aspect of accelerating mutations; not all will stand the test of time. Yet, with each alteration of the genetic sequence, whether it turns out "sticky" or not, reveals to the collective repository what attributes _do_ in fact produce resilient offspring and which do not. In this way, the fabric of our collective genetic repository grows exponentially stronger with every mutation (Gerton and Hawley 485). &#x20;

## The Longview of Humanity's Genetic Repository&#x20;

This exponential compounding of evolutionary mutations would continue unfolding in the continuous process of a billion and more years worth of time, only to eventually arrive to the genetic marvel of the homo sapien sapien. And so it was, from RNA; to prokaryotes; to single-celled protists; to multicellular eukaryotes; and everything in between those microscopic smooth operators, all the way up to _homo sapien sapiens,_ this species – and its consciousness – owes a great deal.&#x20;

While they had no means by which to know or understand, how these structurally simple organisms grew in complexity, variability and genetic fitness over time, out of nothing more than the unconscious will to survive; and in their success did they propagate the entirety of earth's biological machines, all of humanity — entirely oblivious in the star role. It appears that every biological machine is doing just the same and simply acting out an ever-increasingly difficult will to live, for this is exactly what early humans were doing when they first stood upright; when they learned to walk; learned to run; learned to swim; learned to farm and heard; and so on. This impressive bunch even learned to fly.&#x20;

Such is the spirit that buzzes through the collective _unfolding-now_, and has since that first RNA strand begot DNA. Four billion years of genetic life is heard in the cicada song, in a conversation between friends. Specifically for humankind, we are young, just over ten millennia in this entangled, ever-unfolding web of biological machines that has succeeded in surviving, in making chromosomal-potent, adaptive evolutionary choices through overlapping, collapsing intensities, ensuring their own survival and efforting their species to continue its process. Such is why this planet still today is burgeoning with adaptive and adapting biological life. In each continuous _fluency_ of time there exist countless unconscious genetic leaps being made by organisms the world over to continue their existing; and humanity seems now presented one the cards which seemingly no other biological machine has yet been dealt.

## The First to Take the Exit off the Genetic Beltway

Unlike the 4 billion year old prokaryote, the one species that can read these words is self-aware of its conscious, observable moving through the _unfolding-now_. This gift we are given endows us with both an opportunity and a responsibility, for it is _only_ this conscious-of-self species that is able to usher in, just as RNA did for DNA, the next great leap in data transference between _machinae_.&#x20;

While we give thanks to them, we are no longer unicellular microscopic bugs. We are powerful, communicative agents. And while this species still depends on its genetic pathway to transfer biological material, the repository that deploys data along these lines has plateaued in evolutionary significance. Its dominance has been supplanted by a far more malleable, faster, more efficient pathway for our primary means of moving our intelligence between bodies.&#x20;

It is born of the way we communicate with one another: For ten thousand years and more, _Homo Sapien Sapiens_ have communicated through body language, vocalization, technologies; this has largely been taken for granted, until recently. Much work has been done already in smoothing this transition from prioritizing the genetic pathway to that of the memetic pathway—the efforts of George Church, Ray Kurzweil, and John Maynard Smith will be looked to in the coming pages to assist our genetic-to-memetic metamorphic acceleration. In our success we might hope to give the same gift that RNA gave us.&#x20;

[^1]: 
