# Aligning 'Humanity' On Relational Lines

This book, much as it takes _humanity_—particularly its evolutionary life on and beyond Earth—as its foremost philosophical concern, requires that a clarifying attendance be taken at the outset to sufficiently define the parameters by which it understands the concept. That is to say, we must situate, within a viable, sustained theoretical framework, _the human_, both individually and collectively, not only as a _something_ that exists in the world, but _how_ that _something_ '_somethings_' in relation it. Should this step be foregone, the reader should have no grounding or confidence that their interpretation of the words to follow are, in fact, the delivery intended. Such is the purpose of this prologue.&#x20;

First, we will introduce, as our framework of choice, a preexisting theoretical concept already well established in the human and social sciences. Then, we will outline a particular _lived_ historical precedent, one that embodied this understanding of humanity; by this, we may more aptly situate the concept within this book's thought system, which we call 'ACEL'. Finally, steps will be taken to orient the reader with certain considerations attendant to the book's theoretical _buy-in_.&#x20;

As ACEL values both empirical and philosophical approaches to understanding human life, we break ground in this process with a brief survey of the historical landscape of human perception studies, and then move into the broader concerns proferred by phenomenology. &#x20;

## Challenges in Studying '_the human_'

### The Elusive Nature of Human Perception

As an area of technical study, human sensory perception stands as one of the most discipline-ranging and historically attended-to research subjects in academic, clinical, and commercial fields. And yet, even with its scientific origins dating back to Aristotle's _De Anima_ (350BCE), the full scope and mystery of human sensory perception has continued to elude our species' grasp. Even with countless reworkings and reimaginings—whether theoretical, empirical, or technological—we are still only so much closer to a comprehensive, true, and definitive model by which our culture actionably understands our sensory faculties and their relation to affective stimuli. &#x20;

Despite this failure to-date, our collective curiosity remains at full mast. This can be seen by the fact that the Nobel Prize was just awarded in 2021 to two sensory perception researchers. While this accolade was given for breakthroughs in the biological sciences, perhaps the most incisive contributions have come from within the human and social sciences, particularly that of anthropology, sociology, and philosophy.&#x20;

### Descartes' "Disastrous Classification"

Admittedly, though, even these efforts all too often end up doing more harm than good, as their architects inadvertently reify one certain outdated, even dangerous idea—an idea that British mathematician and philosopher Alfred North Whitehead termed the "Bifurcation of Nature”: René Descartes' "disastrous classification of substances into two species, bodily substance and mental substance"—in other words, the epistemological division between subject and object, self and other, nature and science (Whitehead, _Process_ 74). In remarkably ironic and damaging fashion to studies with embodied experience, this divide has plagued philosophy for centuries, often leaving even the most holistic think to have already, before even putting pen to to pad, withdrawn the agency from their subject's theoretical body, already pulled it out of its _lifeworld_ (Husserl 24).&#x20;

However, there is hope, yet; and it it is found primarily in the theoretical rebuttals, _contra-Descartes_, of a few contemporary anthropologists and philosophers.

## '_Relationality_' in Ecological Anthropology & Its Promise as a Suitable Framework

For British anthropologist Gregory Bateson, this removal of agency, brought on as it was by Descartes, catalyzes a suicide of meaning: In borrowing the concepts of _content_ and _context_ from structural linguistics to draw out his theory on human-environment relations, he writes, "the word only exists as such—only has “meaning”—in the larger context of the utterance, which again has meaning only in a relationship” (Bateson, _Steps_ 410). With this, Bateson is suggesting that _meaning_ (i.e. content), does not, in fact, have meaning—is not _itself_—until it comes into _relation_ with the _context_ in which it is placed. Being, without being _in relation to_ a world, is an utterly meaningless abstraction for Bateson. His student, Tim Ingold, confirms this:

> In Bateson's account... information only exists thanks to the movement of the perceiver relative to his or her surroundings. Bateson constantly emphasised that stable features of the world remain imperceptible unless we move in relation to them... Through this \[eye] scanning movement we _draw_ distinctions, in the sense not of representing them graphically, but of ‘pulling them out’... the world opens out to the mind through a process of revelation. (Ingold, _Perception_ 18)

Similarly, Ingold views, "Organic life... \[as] active rather than reactive, the creative unfolding of an entire field of relations within which beings emerge and take on the particular forms they do, each in relation to the others." His theory of an "‘ecology of life'... \[accounts for] the whole-organism-in-its-environment. In other words, ‘organism plus environment’ should denote not a compound of two things, but one indivisible totality. That totality is, in effect, a developmental system" (Ingold, _Perception_ 19). This theoretical suture recasts the mind, which was altogether abstracted by Descartes, back into its original _livingness_:

> We do not... have to think of mind or consciousness as a layer of being over and above that of the life of organisms, in order to account for their creative involvement in the world. Rather, what we may call mind is the cutting edge of the life process itself, the ever-moving front of what Alfred North Whitehead (1929: 314) called a ‘creative advance into novelty'. (Ingold, _Perception_ 19)

Thus, for both Bateson and Ingold, the mind—its cognition and perceptions—is not, must not be displaced from its environment, the relation to which brings it to life, to meaning; nor can the environment be closed off or abstracted away from the mind, lest emergence die and all becomes imperceptible. How closely this relationality recalls Maurice Merleau-Ponty's sentiments in _Phenomenology of Perception_:

> One must therefore reject as an abstraction any analysis of bodily space which takes account only of figures and points, since these can neither be conceived nor be without horizons... I am not in space and time, nor do I conceive space and time; I belong to them, my body combines with them and includes them... To be a body, is to be tied to a certain world, as we have seen; our body is not primarily in space: it is of it... We shall need to reawaken our experience of the world as it appears to us in so far as we are in the world through our body, and in so far as we perceive the world with our body. But by thus remaking contact with the body and with the world, we shall also rediscover ourself, since, perceiving as we do with our body, the body is a natural self and, as it were, the subject of perception. (Merleau-Ponty 115-16, 162, 170, 239)

While the holistic tone of this phenomenological model arrives wholesome and hopeful with its dissolutions of dichotomies and its strength in a unified vision, the truth is that this theoretical framework—as it accounts for every molecular mobilization in every moment of a given material plane—is, without exaggeration, nauseating in scale. To add insult to injury, here we must include the famously labyrinthine Gilles Deleuze and Felix Guattari, whose synergistic, vibrating world (to which, for matters of space, justice cannot be done here) generates infinitely emergent intensities and affects (Deleuze and Guattari, _Plateaus_). Their fountain of relations is no doubt exhilarating to theorize upon from a distance; it is quite another to try and obtain empirical evidence, as mapping even five seconds of the affect experienced by a body in motion could very well take years, even lifetimes.&#x20;

## Why _Lines_? A _Relational_ Habitus is an _Agent's_ Habitus

When approached relationally, our five sense perceptions seem to coordinate an utter aversion to containment-by-mapping. Just _one_ sense, were one in fact to be parseable from the group, is a matter of bewilderingly frenetic, multiplicitous lines of affective relation (i.e. affective connectivities between the body, or a part or parts of the body, and some aspect or aspects of its surrounding phenomenological environment) gushing forth their emergence without pause—each vibrating at varying magnitudes—to and from no permanent destination, simultaneously striking subadditive quantities and superadditive quantities, constantly shifting relational touchpoints across its topographical landscape (which is, in fact, itself). And that is just _one_ sense. We have _five_, and they are _all_ interconnected. One can try to imagine the permutations.&#x20;

Such is our relational reality, our gift: the utterly complex, _integrated_ multiplicity of sensory systems. In this framework, their lines of affect cannot be said to be definitively unidirectional, bidirectional, or multidirectional, or any combination of the three; for, parsing the magnitudes of these affective relations from one another proves incomprehensibly difficult, especially in that they are all perpetually emergent, exponentiating in permutational size whenever one crosses another—which is, in fact, all the time, all at once without pause. Even when we take no notice of the smaller magnitudes, perhaps the cars passing by in the background during a city sidewalk conversation, we know that our senses do not shut off. Lines of affect everywhere forever always. Merleau-Ponty's sentiments again ring resonant:

> I do not bring together one by one the parts of my body; this translation and this unification are performed once and for all within me: they are my body, itself... perception is always a reading off from the same sensory data, but constantly accelerated, and operating with ever more attenuated signals... our body is not an object for an ‘I think’, it is a grouping of lived-through meanings which moves towards its equilibrium. Sometimes a new cluster of meanings is formed; our former movements are integrated into a fresh motor entity, the first visual data into a fresh sensory entity, our natural powers suddenly come together in a richer meaning... (Merleau-Ponty 173, 176, 177)

When viewed relationally, then, the sheer complexity of the perceptual mega-aggregator that we embody becomes more fully appreciated. The human body's affective habitus is no less than performance art par excellence (_sans_ _effort_, no less); yet its marvel is so often passed over with attenuated descriptions akin to their being deterministic state machines, basic 1:1 computational designs. This is a highly misleading dilution of our body's potency, removed as it is from its true relational power; indeed, these inaccurate, impotent models of the body form the foundation of so  many hegemonic systems. We need to adopt at scale a more accurate model of embodiment.&#x20;

Relationality injects its promise just here: this framework, when _lived_, allows for, encourages even, the training, the directional manipulation of these lines. That is to say, a relational framework of the body reintroduces _agency_ into our habitus. It opens out an existence where clear structural pathways—e.g., relational lines of perception—present ever-ready arenas by which to activate agency. So it is that, with this framework, we arrive to the following: an agent embodied in relational dynamism with the material, spatial environment with which it shares emergent manifestation; a dance shared across affective lines of perception that, in its unfolding, generates information and meaning, which is itself fed back into the web of relations to accelerate the unfolding emergences on their way.

## Sensory Perception

In many ways, the description above of the affective body-environment-relation machine is already how we intuitively understand phenomenological perception: at baseline, perception _cannot_ take place without 1) some assemblage of a perceiving body: a brain and a central nervous system are requisite for the processing of 2) stimuli—itself the second requirement. In other words, to even meet the bare minimum qualifications of the _possibility_ of perception, one must appreciate as _necessary_ both the _content_—the body—and the _context_—its environment—of perception.

More importantly, though, it is the theoretical leap, from the _content_ and _context_ as being (only) _necessary,_ to their shared _ontological_ _equality_—that is, they in and of themselves are evidently regarded as being _of equal value_—that will take this book where it needs to go theoretically. We might recall Ingold here, that life "is not a compound of two things, but an indivisible totality” (Ingold, _Perception_ 19), which, for Bateson, operates in a cybernetic feedback loop (Bateson, _Steps_ 411-12). It will be no far stone to throw to see how artfully, how seamlessly this framing of such an embodied agent—_cognizant_ of their dynamism and shared equal existence with their material surroundings—fits, with asymptotic precision, ACEL's _human_.&#x20;

Thus presents our theoretical grounding for ACEL's _human-world_ embodied: a framework that will _open_, rather than close; contain, rather than control. This model will offer a supportive ground from which ACEL's goals for humanity may lift off, may grow the relational possibilities between what embodiment means and what spaces those bodies might manifest themselves in—all the while its lines of affective relation dissolving the rigid structures between body and not-body—all toward the _Energy Machines_. Before we arrive there, however, we must continue to build this theoretical base for embodiment.
