# Classical Borders for a New Body

It is by virtue of modernity's deleterious, even impotent mode of embodiment that ACEL sees as imperative this collective shift to a more relational, and therefore more agented, _lived_ world. Fortunately, this process need not be started from scratch; our historical archive holds informative models from which we might pull elements and construct a worldview better equipped to handle the challenges that lie ahead.&#x20;

## Finding Precedent in Humanity's Historical Archive

The contemporary view of the body is a relatively recent phenomenon: With the inauguration of the World Health Organization in 1948, a new era was instantiated and stabilized, one that conformed, on a global scale, to a standardized model of the human body—both its anatomical and its biological structures. While other organizations were to follow and contribute, the WHO, in its setting forth global health and medical standards that largely inform most governments' policies in these respects, has (for better or worse) centralized, perhaps sterilized, our understanding of humanity's anatomical vehicle. While global society today has by and large accustomed itself to this "bodily gaze" without question, it is still less than a century old, and therefore yet but an infant in the eyes of the half-lives of certain cultural bodies come and gone, of countless permutations of "bodily gazes" that have materialized, evolved, died, transformed anew over the past millennia. And while it is here that ACEL, philosophical infant that it is, stands poised to proclaim and deliver its own novel contribution to our repository of bodily understandings, this effort would doubtless fall noiselessly before the WHO's post-growth, governmental vision—that is, were it to proceed without proper context or theoretical precedent. As it refuses failure in its overarching mission and demands to be taken seriously, it accepts these requisites, and so turns to the past to seek similarly aligned thematic templates upon which it may establish itself.&#x20;

Fortunately, humanity possesses an extensive historical archive: preserved writings and historical materials from our species' distant past open to us, by the hand of renowned scholars, not only the contextual histories of these artifacts, but also (should we be so lucky) their most incisive bits of wisdom. Ever so often, we are this lucky; that is, we are able to discern from a material an intellectual gem of a given historical culture—perhaps an unacknowledged, _lived_ assumption of theirs. On even less frequent occasion are we able to apply this gem of wisdom to our contemporary situation. This is precisely what Harvard Japanologist and historian Shigehisa Kuriyama has done in his 1999 monograph, _The Expressiveness of the Body and the Divergence of Greek and Chinese Medicine_, which follows the coeval and disparate evolutions of medical practice in ancient Greece and ancient China. While these historically factual accounts alone would stand an historian's honorable work, Kuriyama extends from them theoretical revelations on not just the origins of the eastern 'bodily gaze'—the author's term for a culturally-emic mode of perceiving and understanding the human body—and its western counterpart, but also how certain elements within each respective cultural repository visibly betray active priorities in our present day. Insofar as the book delivers glimpses into two ancient _lived worlds_ by way of their antithetical medical repositories, it presents how these disparate yet contemporaneous cultures instantiated and reified through time their respective phenomenological worlds—Kuriyama shows how this often occurred, in both cases, through arbitrary cultural assumptions and preferences. In his magnifying major cultural suppositions that have lasted well over two millennia, Kuriyama shines light on the nature of memetic resilience; that this will become in the following pages a foremost priority for ACEL, _The Expressiveness_—holding sacred some of the clearest analysis of early medical theory of the last few centuries—will prove to be an immaculate precedent upon which its thought system should situate its theoretical foundation.&#x20;

By positioning the ancient Greeks and ancient Chinese at a shared starting line, Kuriyama maps—in almost cartographic manner (reminiscent of Deleuze and Guattari)—these two cultures' (or multiplicities') linear degrees of separation over time—their directional half-lives in divergent lines, as well as any lines of resonance or points of contact or traversing between their models, should those exist. Insofar as this methodology presents a _relational_ evolution of both 'bodily gazes', credence is lent to ACEL's relational methodology; it also offers clear visibility into both the lived assumptions of these cultures, as well as which of these memetic elements possessed more resilience than others (and, potentially, _why_—as ACEL intends to maximize the memetic half-life of humanity's intelligence repository, it will take note of _what lasts_, and apply this knowledge later when it constructs its own _bodily gaze_). Following this, we will look at one more 'bodily gaze', this one pulled from analyses of the 12th century Daoist meditative practice, _neidan_ 内丹.

### Historical Case Study 1: Hellenistic Physicians Install "Agency" into the Body

Kuriyama shows the western world, in almost embarrassing spotlight, that its normative understanding of embodiment can be more or less traced directly back to the Hellenistic Greek physicians—specifically, their "muscle-consciousness" that followed the "rise of anatomy" (Kuriyama, _Expressiveness_ 143). For it was within this new framework, where "Muscles ... were not just flesh perceived with enhanced perspicuity; they were unique organs invested with a unique function," that we have humanity's first record associating the physical body with _willful agency_ (144). Kuriyama notes it was the physician Galen, in his _On the Movement of Muscles_, to whom the West is indebted for its two millennia of marveling over muscularity:

> Galen observes that some processes in the body go on without our attending to them, and we can’t directly influence them even if we wish. Such is the case with digestion and pulsation. But there are also activities, like walking and talking, that hinge on our desires and intentions. We can choose to walk faster, or slow down, stand still. We can alter the cadence of our speech. We can do all these things, Galen explains, because we have these organs called muscles. This is what muscles are: “the organs of voluntary motion.” Muscles allow us to choose what we do, and when, and how; and this choice marks the divide between voluntary actions and involuntary processes. Muscles, in short, identify us as genuine agents. (144)

As this book, much like Galen's, holds a priority interest in embodied _agency_, we quote Kuriyama at length here in order to show the full scope of the cognitive leap by which our humanity was forever changed; that is, when the human body was injected with this quality of _agency_—with intentional choice, with autonomy, with intentional individuality. Following the full extension of this association, that between muscularity and agency, we might beg pardon in including Kuriyama's conclusion on the topic:&#x20;

> The rise of the preoccupation with muscles ... is inextricably intertwined with the emergence of a particular conception of personhood. Specifically, in tracing the crystallization of the concept of muscle, we are also ... tracing the crystallization of the sense of an autonomous will. After more time, interest in the muscularity of the body was inseparable from a preoccupation with the agency of the self. (144)

In stark clarity do we see here that the modern western _individual_—hardly some eternal, metaphysical truth of evolutionary individuating supremacy—is but an inadvertent, cultural _creation_, a concept formulated over time by a few Greek physicians, namely Galen.&#x20;

This is not to say they are wrong, of course. As we, the descendants of this direct line of influence, quite literally embody this cultural vision, our western cultural repository generally agrees that physical strength—the physical manifestation of which are generally understood to be _muscles_—is a basic building block of personal agency. In a strictly physical sense, this might mean that any given person can lift more weight when they have built the requisite strength (manifested in muscularity) to do so; not so much when they have not—in this sense, _muscles_, quite accurately, suggests that a body can _do_ more; _affect_ more. But Kuriyama, through Galen, suggests that the abilities of those with muscularity extend beyond only the physical realm: that these strong, sinewy bodies are actually more capable of maneuvering through the world by way of individuated choices. By this culturally-specific logic, physical strength was directly connected to one's agency, an agency that extended beyond a mere physical level; and the visible manifestations of this strength were none other than muscles.

#### Theoretical Assumption 1: Agency is _Mutable_ &#x20;

Within the above worldview, which has evidently in some form lasted for two millennia, lies a hidden assumption that is crucially important to the _agent_ found in the following chapters: While not yet knowing the precise chemical reactions behind muscularity, Galen and other Hellenistic physicians understood empirically that exercise was, more or less, causative to muscle-building (and thereby, strength); its lack, their attenuation. Put another way, they recognized that one's strength, vis-a-vis muscles, _change_ depending on a person's _actions_ (e.g., exercise, or not exercise). And, by this emic (i.e. intra-culturally regarded) logic that muscles were indicative of "personhood", or worldly agency, we arrive to the following syllogism:&#x20;

A. Muscularity is _directly representative_ of emic agency;&#x20;

B. Muscularity can _change_ (by one's _actions_); i.e. muscularity is _actionably_ mutable; _**therefore**_**,**&#x20;

C. Emic agency can _change_ (by one's _actions_); i.e. emic agency is _actionably_ mutable.&#x20;

In short, these physicians knew, whether intuitively or explicitly, that _agency_ was _mutable_; that is, it could _change._ For Galen, this occurred through active _choice_: One could, by virtue of their _choice_, _act_ in ways to increase their agency.&#x20;

This recalls a more modern, yet not dissimilar notion, where, again, _choice_ sits as the primary mover of _action._ This is found within 20th century Austrian economist Ludwig von Mises's understanding of "the subjective theory of value ... the general theory of choice and preference", which suggests that, "In making his choice man chooses not only between various material things and services. All human values are offered for option" (Mises, _Human Action_ 3). Much as Galen, then Mises emphasizes the _range_ of _multiplicities_ (per D. & G.) from which an agent one may actively choose. Far from a passive enterprise in either model, the affective potentialities latent within _choice_ directly create any and all mobilizations of self: In this frame, agents _choose_ themselves. So, too, is this relational intensity reminiscent of contemporary anthropologist Terrence Turner's discourse on forms or things in traditions of Animism as having “the power to produce themselves” (Turner 34).&#x20;

While of course Galen's view is not one shared by all humans throughout time, no doubt does its evident cultural penetration boast a half-life that will likely see many more agents and their choices. In fact, ACEL would do well to contribute to this end, as the model will be shown to fit seamlessly with its overarching _raison d'être_. &#x20;

The next historical case study on a medieval Daoist meditative practice will open more nuanced yet equally valuable theoretical insights. From this exercise, ACEL will begin to learn of its powerful immanence.&#x20;

### Historical Case Study 2:  The _Body_ in Early Chinese Philosophy & Medieval Daoist Meditation&#x20;

The guiding assumptions in ACEL's 'bodily gaze' find a substantive amount of theoretical resonance within the cultural archive of early China, and in particular one its earliest native religions, Daoism. Through vehicles like paintings, poems, and meditative manuals, historians have uncovered revelations of the human body in early Chinese thought that are confoundingly different than our current standardized, government-approved body. While the cohesion between the balanced equanimity of the early Chinese body and ACEL's brazen accelerating agent may not appear evident on the surface, the underlying assumptions guiding the first, when extrapolated and applied to the second, it will become clear that the two are inherently of the same immanent fabric, both of which work together to reframe of what a body can, and eventually _must_, be.&#x20;

We start this second case study by surveying the excellent secondary scholarship on early China, which, unsurprisingly show that, as opposed to the West's muscular agent, the early Chinese body was one where the “opposition of internal and external did not signify” (Kuriyama, _Imagination_ 19); rather, “Earth and body were depicted in the same style, because both belonged to the same vision of being” (_Imagination_ 27). The boundaries between these two realms were perceived with an air of ambivalence; to again recall Deleuze and Guattari, even depictions of the _viscera_ were drawn according to a “logic of cartography” (_Imagination_ 26). This inner landscape might best be seen in the 18th century _Neijing tu_ 內經圖, a considerably modern Daoist diagram of the internal body. Daoism scholar Kristofer Schipper has said that within this Daoist body were “mountains and rivers, ponds, forests, paths, and barriers”; it was “a whole landscape laid out with dwellings, palaces, towers, walls, and gates sheltering a vast population” (Schipper 100).&#x20;

What presents from the description above is a _zero-degree of distinction_ between body and environment. This worldview, phenomenologically preferred as it was, reveals a pervasive, cultural indifference in ancient China between what is internal and what is external to the physical delimiting boundaries of the human body; Kuriyama has noted that the distinction did not register either in being nor seeing (_Imagination_ 21). To art historian James Elkins, in summarization classical Chinese visions of the body, has said, as indifferently as the visions themselves and in so pithy a way, “The inside is the outside” (Ames and Dissanayake, _Self_ 16).&#x20;

#### Theoretical Assumption 2: Inside = Outside&#x20;

To the unfamiliar, early China's 'bodily gaze' might appear highly unusual—strange, even. How does one live _without corporeal_ _boundaries_? Another reasonable question to ask here would be: How could this worldview possibly cohere with _anything_ at all about ACEL?&#x20;

The answers to both questions lie quiet in the philosophical stillness of Daoism. Regardless of lineage or school, philosophy or religion, Daoism has, since the Han Dynasty, purported that d_ao_ 道 is the all-pervasive cosmic force, considered to be both immanent in and transcendent beyond the phenomenal world; this force manifests in the material, physical world by way of complementary and cosmic-perpetuating forces of _yinyang_ 阴阳. _Dao_ 道 is the guiding principle of all phenomena: that which is _in_ but not _of_ every phenomenal aspect of existence. Daoism scholar Isabelle Robinet has written, “The \[Daoist] universe is constantly re-creating itself in a continuing evolution”; it is a “self-regulating system” defined by a ceaseless flux; _taiji_ 太极 in an ever-returning to the empty equilibrium of _wuji_ 无极  (Robinet, _Taoism_ 7, 11).&#x20;

In other words, that force enabling and perpetuating the entirety of the phenomenal world that is "external" to the body's contours is, in no way—from the immanent to the most positively transcendent—ontological differentiated from that force which enlivens and stirs within the "internal" body (i.e. that which is contained by the skin). In this way, a body and its environment according to Daoist philosophy have no ontological degree of separation; they have no mutual distinction between them; they are not moved by separate forces but by one and the same principle, _dao_ 道, from which arises the myriad phenomenal fluctuations we observe as the world. All of this phenomenal world is _dao_ 道.&#x20;

In traditional Chinese thought, hardly extant were these dichotomies so familiar to our western modes of thought: within—without; body—environment; science—religion. Of this, Japanese philosopher, Yuasa Yasuo, said, “The East has never experienced in its history a conflict between science and religion” (Ames and Dissanayake, _Self_ 347). By this he means the Cartesian epistemological divide, that so twists and stratifies the West, is utterly and fundamentally _absent_ in the whole of the eastern hemisphere. For this reason, ACEL ought look East to study and learn the ease with which Daoism dissolves dichotomies: how _within_ and _without_ are used only as mere linguistic conveniences; how there are in its model barely even lines by which to form relational dynamics in the first place—certainly in its most immanent mode, no lines whatsoever. Daoism is relationality _par excellence_; for, rather than a figurative or superficial shift from a dual to nondual lifeworld, Daoism, despite appearances as a _softer_ philosophy, is actually quite extreme in its mode of _living_ a nondual phenomenological lifeworld. While ACEL is, in many ways, bold and courageous in its aims; the Daoist body, in its silence, radiates true, unfazed courage: for, whom from the West can, without batting an eye, walk directly into the abyss, into the ego-swallowing dissolution of oneself, perpetually, without end, until the body itself dissolves back into _dao_ 道.&#x20;

This is not to discourage ACEL in its philosophical composition. Rather, that it has set forth challenging yet reachable goals for itself—one of which is the need for it to live in earnest by (rather than simply pay lip service to) its deployment of an holistic definition of _humanity_, one whose terms are not so different than the Daoism—it must find some way to manage and reduce the intrinsically dualistic western view from which it was born. It is a difference between a theoretical postulation and a true, earnest and genuine, pure-heart effort to _live_ the _world_ it's _chosen_. It must be model and leader; by this, it chooses to activate its own ontological reorientation, to show by example a moving through of a "manifold of potentials for _how things could be_—what Elizabeth Povinelli … calls ‘the otherwise’” (Holbraad, Pederson, Viveiros de Castro, _Politics_ 1).&#x20;

This fundamental shift it will model in the pages to follow, to show _how things could be_ does indeed require, among other considerations, a reassessment of the ontological _thickness_ of the lines—or striations—that separate what is _inside_ from what is _outside_. While the aim is to _reduce_, by effortful manipulation, the diameter of these lines that contain the human body, this should in no way be assessed as a simultaneous reduction in _agency_. Just the opposite, in fact: In the dissolution of lines or stratifications that _contain_, or the dissolution of _containers altogether_ (i.e. an assemblage of multiplicities of _containing_ lines), one approaches a _becoming_ of what Deleuze and Guattari call a 'Body without Organs', or the 'BwO': This is a conceptual space where the _body_, as it is typically known, once existed, and still does, but differently; that is, the once-upon-a-body has changed insofar as it has excised any and all structurally delimiting, intensity-killing finitudes placed upon it by the stratified, naming—and therefore containing—world. Such is why "it is not 'my' body without organs, instead the 'me' (_moi_) is on it, or what remains of me, unalterable and changing in form, crossing thresholds" (_Plateaus_ 161). It is a plane of pure, latent potentiality:&#x20;

> The BwO causes intensities to pass; it produces and distributes them in a _spatium_ that is itself intensive, lacking extension. It is not space, nor is it in space; it is matter that occupies space to a given degree—to the degree corresponding to the intensities produced. It is nonstratified, unformed, intense matter, the matrix of intensity, intensity = 0; but there is nothing negative about that zero, there are no negative or opposite intensities. Matter equals energy ... That is why we treat the BwO as the full egg before the extension of the organism and the organization of the organs, before the formation of the strata; as the intense egg defined by axes and vectors, gradients and thresholds, by dynamic tendencies involving energy transformation and kinematic movements involving group displacement, by migrations: all independent of accessory forms because the organs appear and function here only as pure intensities. (153)&#x20;

In this achievement—for it is indeed the highest achievement when the BwO is understood positively and not negatively, which is easily possible also—this vacuum of names and _inertia_ asymptotically resembles in nature none other than the Daoist body, ever "constituting an intensive body without organs, Tao, a field of immanence in which desire lacks nothing and therefore cannot be linked to any external or transcendent criterion" (157). D. & G. were well acquainted with Daoism, and understood how Daoist teleology moved toward an utter dissolution of what they saw as their _stratified_ body, replacing it with total, utter identification with _dao_ 道. This process they saw was "a question of making a body without organs upon which intensities pass, self and other ... The field of immanence is not internal to the self, but neither does it come from an external self or a nonself ... it is like the absolute Outside that knows no Selves because interior and exterior are equally a part of the immanence in which they have fused" (156).&#x20;

Fortunately this process is not left to abstraction. Below, we outline a 12th c. Song Dynasty Daoist meditative praxis known as _neidan_ 内丹, or _inner alchemy_, by which one might attain experiential union with _dao_ 道; put another way, how one might safely approach a 'BwO' manifestation. In so expounding,  ACEL will gain one more piece to the puzzle of its theoretical framework. In so doing, ACEL positions itself more likely to secure the future of humanity.

#### Theoretical Assumption 3: Ontology is _Mutable_

Recall above that ACEL has tasked itself with undergoing an ontological mutation, and that it has done this so that it may more honestly _live the world_ in the way it speaks of it. What's more, thanks to the Hellenistic physicians like Galen, we already have a working mode of _mutability_—in the western hemisphere with that of _agency_. Now certainly, owing to the fact that this approach must be different by degree, owing to the fact that agency is a far throw from ontology, or the nature of _being_. Additionally, while there was no similar concept to _agency_ in early China, the culture _did_ adhere to their own culturally-specific assumption of _mutability_, which can be seen best in the Quanzhen Daoist manuals on the meditative practice known as "inner alchemy", or _neidan_ 内丹.&#x20;

Emerging as a mature practice in the Northern Song Dynasty (960–1127), _neidan_ 内丹 is a type of meditative breathing and visualization technique that actively manipulates the body’s three energies‚ the “Three Treasures” or _sanbao_三寶, _jing_ 精_,_ vital essence, _qi_ 氣_,_ breath or air, _and shen_ 神, spirit—to _sublimate the body from a denser entity into a more refined one._ It refines _jing_ by visualizing the gathering of _qi_ 氣 in the belly (which is known as the “cauldron”, _ding_ 鼎; or “furnace”, _lu_ 爐), and repeatedly circulating it up the spine, over the head and down in front of the body, until _shen_  神 or "spirit" is generated. This general process was known as _lianqi huashen_ 練氣化身, or “refining breath to transmute it into spirit.” Unsurprisingly, D. & G. also deploy _neidan_ 内丹 to proceed in their Daoist orientation of a BwO, relating, "We see in it the formation of a circuit of intensities between female and male energy, with the woman playing the role of the innate or instinctive force (Yin) stolen by or transmitted to the man in such a way that the transmitted force of the man (Yang) in turn becomes innate, all the more innate: an augmentation of powers" (157).

Because _neidan_ 内丹 was an effortful method of energetic reversal—e.g., a _pulling_ bodily energy up the spine from below and circulating along certain meridians in the body—Quanzhen expert Louis Komjathy states, it was a “manipulation of the body in ‘unnatural’ ways and conscious alteration of conventional biological patterns." Komjathy views this rigorous processual practice of _bodily transfiguration_ through energetic manipulation as _teleologically oriented_ towards “a shift in ontological condition." In other words, this practice was aimed at becoming “a different kind of being” (Komjathy, _Perfection_ 168, 12, 146).

Whether or not this is true—whether their becoming _a different kind of being_—is irrelevant. The important piece here is these Quanzhen meditators _believed in the practice's efficacy_; that is, they held a confidence that both their physical and ontological substance _could_, given the right conditions and actions (_neidan_ was practiced in tandem with Confucian and Buddhist ethics), _transmutate_. In short, their world truly was aimed at becoming _a different kind of being_; they believed these efforts _could_, and _would_, transform one’s _actual material body_ from a denser entity into a more refined, transcendent, and immortal one.

ACEL, with its evolutionary longview, will proclaim a very similar ontological program to that of _neidan_ 内丹: that in the maximization of one's agency, through the acceleration of one's intelligence, one contributes to both one's individual as well as humanity's eventual collective ontological leap. The difference here is merely that ACEL's ontological efforts also support the entirety of the species. With that said, there is a kindred spirit between the two strategies in the descriptive language of the final transmutation: Quanzhen meditators intended to become a fundamentally, ontologically different being: an immortal; they speak of shedding one's skin in the final transformation. In the latter chapters of this book, ACEL will posit its ontological program as including efforts that lead to a shedding of the body; an increase in longevity; and a teleology aimed at becoming energetically indistinguishable from the universe itself. Taken all together, such is why _neidan_ 内丹 praxis is proffered as ACEL's framework by which it can most effectively execute its ontological leap.&#x20;

#### Theoretical Assumption 4: Shen 神 = Energy Machine

This last point brings us to the final theoretical thread between early China, Quanzhen meditation, and ACEL, as there appears one more significant commonality in their descriptive language of the final, ultimate goal in each respective thought system.&#x20;

Recall that _dao_ 道 is the all-pervasive cosmic force and guiding principle of the phenomenal world, both immanent in and transcendent beyond; _in_, but not _of_, all existence.&#x20;

As shown, the ultimate goal of _neidan_ 内丹, is to transmutate into _shen_ 神; for Robinet, this could be described as “finding illumination by returning to the fundamental order of the cosmos” (Robinet, _Neidan_ 299). It is therefore a teleological system motivated towards a cosmic union with _dao_ 道 via _shen_ 神, which in turn constituted transcendence and immortality. Similarly, Komjathy states that it was method of "becoming an _embodi_ment of the Dao”; it was a process of manifesting an “attunement with the Dao as an existential mode” (Komjathy, _Perfections_ 12, 144).&#x20;

This pursuit of longevity directionally oriented toward a bodily dissolution into the fabric of the universe is almost identical in description to ACEL's "Energy Machine". Perhaps, ACEL might even consider _dao_ 道, then, to be exactly that force into which the Energy Machines dissolve and assimilate with, thereby completing humanity's goal. With such similar language guiding both of their goals, it is quite curious then, if _shen_  神 might just be ACCEL's "Energy Machine". Try to keep these descriptions in mind as we arrive to Part II chapter 7 of this book.&#x20;
