---
description: >-
  "Our brains are bigger, to be sure, but it is mainly due to their infestation
  by memes that they gain their powers" - Dan Dennett, "The Evolution of
  Culture"
layout:
  title:
    visible: true
  description:
    visible: true
  tableOfContents:
    visible: true
  outline:
    visible: true
  pagination:
    visible: true
---

# Chapter 3: Memesis: The New Dominant Intelligence

### New Fare for Our Natural Appetite for Knowledge

For all of the evolutionary mechanisms that have shaped and reshaped human biological systems over our species' extant millennia, it is the manifest complexity of the brain—particularly the frontal lobe, the sensory cortex, and the hippocampus (just some of the neural structures determining how our brain seeks out, processes, and retains information)—that transformed humans into the exploratory powerhouses we have become (de Villiers).

That humans wield the planet's the most complex hippocampus—this, the seat of compulsion to learn—our species asserts unparalleled ranges of agency, ambits amplitudes and amperages away in our need to seek out and acquire knowledge. Another way of putting this is we are the biological machine most programmed _to be curious;_ we are also the best hardwired to gratify that curiosity. This is because within our Limbic System—a system consisting of the Hippocampus, Cingulate Gyrus, Thalamus, and the Basal Ganglia—resides a more or less inexhaustible, infinite reservoir of memory: infinite, if not for the finite body in which it is housed (Shapiro et al.).&#x20;

From this last reflection comes manifest an existential pressure, an intensity born of finitude that moves one to act—ACEL, for itself, suggests within frameworks of optimism. Resonating with the concept of "post-traumatic growth" in the field of psychology (Turner et al.), this reckoning with mortality is but one mode of inspiration by which one arrives to an ACEL mindset, to a more intimate engagement with, a more direct and earnest activation of the latent potentials within one's agency. Which cadence one's agency takes from here, whatever the genre of their manifestation, all is in every case propelled memetically forward by the individual's self-contained, deliberately-aimed, active will: each curious step taken across the memetic topography is a _toward-intelligence, toward-knowledge—toward-evolution._&#x20;

It is just thanks to this pressurized pursuit of knowledge that has facilitated our deep knowledge of the contours, the textures of the genetic pathway, its fault lines and its possibilities—by this research humanity has accelerated its ability to counter or slow hereditary diseases, to optimize prenatal health as well as longevity (relatively speaking, as we'll see), etc. While there is still more to be done with our genetic evolutionary knowledge, as knowledge, in every case, is an asymptotic pursuit, it has come to the fore that we can no longer ignore the enormity of information we human beings pass from one to the next _outside of_ genetic lines. And so it is we must ask, what of this memetic pathway? How does information _move_ on such an incongruously-shaped highway? How do these memes get thrown from one place to the next? How do they stick? What even constitutes a _meme_?

#### 'A Memetic World Market'

Metaphorically speaking, these memes have been compared to the likes of pollen or seeds, dropped and scooped up by another, dropped again—all along the way to nowhere—are, by nature, sticky; they are contagious "like viruses" (Dennett, _Evolution_ 4). One's simple walking along the path of life becomes itself a stroll through 'the memetic world market' whereby others too—all persons, in fact—whether intentionally or not, will enter the memetic thoroughfare by proxy, and come into a _range of exchange_ (4). Such is our memetic evolution carried out—it happens simply _because we move_.&#x20;

While this image does purport memetic transfer as a largely inadvertent enterprise, we, as self-aware agents extending out our relational lines, equipping more agency to oneself with each effected acquisition from, and contribution to, our collective memetic repository, also possess within us a potent opportunity to _effortfully evolutionize_ our species: that we may deliberately, strategically take our knowledge further and scale ourselves into a memetic repository to the nth degree. This accelerated, _only_-directional compounding of our curiosity-born intelligence and our will-driven agency, these each drum the steady beat of greatest purpose through our biological givens that we cannot extinguish, until we ourselves are.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                &#x20;

And why would we want to temper our body's organic will-to-learn, anyhow? Our body, being a gift to which we have temporary access, with yet-to-be-found ceilings for a maximum knowledge capacity (and agency, for that matter), we must turn our focus to accelerating our intelligence; for, after all, we are quite literally _made to be_ _learners_. And, per ACEL's view: because we can, we _must._ In this way, we, human agents who are "learning simply because we can learn", are hardly different than the spread of memes themselves, which according to philosopher Dan Dennett, saw them as "spreading simply because they could spread"; thus, as with the units of cultural knowledge, just so with their human carrier agents (9). As with memes, so are we; and so we are. In accepting and activating this role within ourselves, that role of intelligence-maximizers via memesis, we directly accelerate the evolution of our species; and, considering the finite nature of embodiment, we prioritize above all an adherence to _efficiency_ in our pursuit of all intelligence.

#### Navigating Memetic Metric Challenges

To this end, that of efficiency, the first thing to which memetic maximizers must attend is the theoretical mechanisms by which we amass, retain, and transfer this largely yet-examined knowledge; for, only if we understand the automaticity of the machine can we most effectively optimize its output. Immediately, however, an issue arises: there is no formally-accepted _unit of measurement_ in cultural evolution studies by which to quantify this type of information transfer; that is, cultural/memetic knowledge. In other words, how are we to know if we are indeed, maximizing the potential of 'the memetic machine'? Biologist Marco Smolla of UPenn, along with team Fredrik Jansson, Laurent Lehmann, Wybo Houkes, Franz J. Weissing, Peter Hammerstein, Sasha R. X. Dall, Bram Kuijper, and Magnus Enquist noted of this, that it is, "so tricky to find a useful concept of units of evolution in cultural evolution (a unit might be the single cultural trait or a set of traits, but also the carrier of a trait, etc.) (Smolla, Jansson, Lehmann, Houkes, Weissing, Hammerstein, Dall, Kuijper, Enquist 6).&#x20;

As such, we must choose one of two routes: either, 1) at substantial theoretical risk, compose ourselves some semblance of a model where "knowable" information—that is, any available information that a given human may or may not know yet—is compartmentalized into quantifiable units so that their transference may be aggregated. With a system of knowledge-measurement in place, humans will be shown to aggregate information against a standardized, statistical backdrop; or, 2) forego altogether the attempt at a formula or loss-function, and accept that the nature of cultural evolution studies is simply _too immediate_, _too everywhere_, _too always_ to fit in any given mathematical formula. Before deciding, we'll move through some historical and contemporary frameworks, and then decide a course of action.&#x20;

### The 'Memes > Genes' Turn in Cultural Evolution Studies

We have had one such model of measurement for well over a century: Ever since Mendel was rediscovered and the study of genetics soon after took rise, our species has long and ubiquitously accepted that genes are the repository of evolutionary blueprints, including that of humans (Rolls-Hansen). The _gene_ thus provides a working model for a unit of _genetic_ knowledge-measurement. But what of non-biological knowledge—i.e. learned information—and its transference? That Mendel's peas did not have a cultural repository is a shame, for genetic mapping only goes so far to help with memetic mapping. Nevertheless, there is hope.&#x20;

While Charles Darwin expounded notions antecedent and foundational to contemporary cultural evolution studies in his 1871 work, _The Descent of Man, and Selection in Relation to Sex_ (Darwin)_,_ it wasn't until 1976 when Richard Dawkins published _The Selfish Gene_ that the gap of non-biological knowledge was sufficiently accounted for and filled. In this groundbreaking and still critically acclaimed book, Dawkins delineates a theoretical process wherein a discrete set of evolutionary data is selected—he terms that which has been chosen, the _replicator_ (Dawkins 19)_—_and then copied and transferred along an evolutionary _line_ or _pathway_ (124). For both variables in said model, the replicator and the line, Dawkins claims there are not one, but _two of each: two_ families of replicators that travel on _two_ respective and distinct pathways (140). These are: 1) biological replicators: _genes_, and the genetic pathway; and 2) cultural replicators: _memes_, and the memetic pathway (144). Dawkins surmises that, while _genes_ are the units of biological evolution, _memes_ are the units of cultural evolution; and both move through processes of vetting and selection towards existential continuity (195).

#### Two Studies

Dawkins' bimodal model of evolutionary data flow thus opened a way to account for both a human's genetic intelligence as well as their cultural, learned intelligence. With such a head start, however, genetics has indomitably maintained its lordship as the primary driver of evolution—that is, until fairly recently. With regards to its ever-more-visible importance in knowledge acquisition and evolutionary influence, Dawkin's cultural quantum of data, the _meme_, has taken the throne away from biological material—at least in certain research labs. University of Maine researchers Timothy Waring and Zach Wood corroborate the substantive evolutionary superiority of memes in their 2021 study:

> &#x20;... the importance of culture is surpassing the value of genes as the primary driver of human evolution .... Culture \[helps people adjust to their environment and meet the challenges of survival and reproduction] more effectively than genes ... We evolve both genetically and culturally over time, but we are slowly becoming ever more cultural and ever less genetic ... With groups primarily driving culture and culture now fueling human evolution more than genetics. (Waring and Wood)

There is, in fact, data to support this memetic eclipse of genetics in terms of evolutionary impact—for why, now, culture "... is a stronger mechanism of adaptation" (Waring et al.) In their publication, Waring et al. state this is due to culture's outperformance of genetics in _three_ key areas: 1)  _speed_; 2) a "_group-learn_" mechanism (lacked altogether by genetics); and, 3), _flexibility_ (Waring et al.). Of the first, they find that culture is "faster: gene transfer occurs only once a generation, while cultural practices can be rapidly learned and frequently updated" (Waring et al.). Of the second, culture's "group-learn" component, they find that "Factors like conformity, social identity and shared norms and institutions — factors that have no genetic equivalent ... \[make] 'culturally organized groups appear to solve adaptive problems more readily than individuals, through the compounding value of social learning and cultural transmission in groups'" (Waring et al.). Per memetic flexibility, Waring et al. state that "Culture is also more flexible than genes: gene transfer is rigid and limited to ... two parents, while cultural transmission is based on flexible human learning and effectively unlimited with the ability to make use of information from peers and experts far beyond parents. As a result, cultural evolution is a stronger type of adaptation than old genetics" (Waring et al.). Smolla agree

> In biological evolution, information (genetic traits) is encoded in ... the sequence of physical molecular structures ... By contrast, in cultural evolution, cultural information ... takes the form of mental representations ... an individual cannot change its genome, but can make changes to the composition of its cultural traits ... while genes can be frequently and accurately accessed and copied, there are very limited possibilities of passing information to the genome that can be inherited by offspring. By contrast, mental representations cannot be directly observed or copied, but due to the high flexibility of the nervous system, mental representations can be continuously altered before they are exhibited and transmitted to others. (Smolla et al. 3)

These two studies, taken together, betray the beginnings of a scientific turn in evolutionary studies, one spurred by an acknowledgment of heretofore unexamined lines of efficiency within memetic learning that do not manifest in genetic learning. While there is still much to be done in the ways of defining parameters and understanding more intelligibly the mechanisms of memetic transfer, it is nevertheless promising to know that this is actively being carried out.

As it should be, for it is hardly new to accept that culture has an impact on what we know and how we evolve; no one with common sense would deny that our genetic structure is the only mechanism by or through which information is passed. It is a different thing altogether to see scholars in scientific agreeance that cultural transmission possesses, not just some, but in fact _more_ substantive impacts and potentialities than its genetic counterpart, most of which are still untapped or unknown. Were we to resist this obvious shift in evolution and stubbornly ignore this paradigm shift in information, proclaiming until our species' last breath (which would come far sooner in this case) that we truly did have only one evolutionary pathway, we would have all but already begun the slow collapse of our existential road, possibly destined to remain the same or even a regressed species one millennia from now, our potential having stared us in the eye throughout.

#### Agency is Inherent to the Memetic Intelligence

As would Dawkins, ACEL refuses this fate, for the sheer obvious fact of the omnipresence of memes is too staggering a theoretical reality to turn a blind eye, especially an eye ever-attuned to latent potency and openings to express agency. Indeed, it is just in the way that the memetic model accounts for, even _needs_ agency for this information to move that ACEL sees humanity's greatest promise. Briefly we note how, in their notion of the _continuous acquisition_ of culture, Smolla et al. explicitly account for the _agency_ involved in memetic transference:

> Genetic traits are in place at the beginning of an individual’s life, whereas cultural traits are acquired throughout the entire life. An important consequence of continuous acquisition is that culture is acquired sequentially through a combination of episodes of social learning (learning from others), and individual practice (trial and error, insight, etc.) ... making the individual an active force in the transmission... Cultural evolution can proceed much faster than biological evolution, both in rate of change and in terms of trait complexity. (Smolla et al. 4)

In stark clarity do we see, then, in this particular knowledge-pathway, the locus of humanity's most promising path forward—in its opening both a theoretical and applied space where we may optimally accelerate our intelligence, and thereby maximize our agency. The promise of our continuity lies in our becoming aware and taking ownership of the fact that that we are "the individual" who wields "an active force in the transmission" (4). That these memes are flying, always, everywhere, always growing, always transforming themselves and teaching along every line traveled, all that they pass by or pass through—this is the precisely the plane on which we most formidably accelerate our potential: we grab hold of them; we form them; we distribute them _consciously_—and this last piece is the difference, where before memetic learning may have been by-the-by, happenstance, ACEL sees this intelligence to hold potency that ought to be grabbed hold of, accelerated, maximized, that we might extend the existence and evolution of humanity. It is by this activation of self—through the frenzied life of memes, the possible worlds in them—that agency accelerates, and leaves any chance of a crude, dull-witted submission to genetic determinism impossible to accept. Says the ACEL, there something buzzes in memes that needs peeling back—the desire to learn from that which we learn.&#x20;

And so do we find—in its continuous giving, its inexhaustible variability, its shared compounding—our potential El Dorado of knowledge, our virtually infinite learning reservoir, in memes. Most importantly, we must start this effort now. For only now, a century after Mendel gave us that admittedly _accelerated-for-the-era_ discovery of hereditary mechanisms, do humans seem to be washing off its residual, unintended ownership of, not the way human evolution transpires, but of the way we think it does, and the false bounds by which the discovery of genetics has, until Dawkins, largely fettered us away from evolutionary reservoirs unbound. For, memes are, through the form and function by which they move through any medium whatsoever, educative, and by that, harnessable, even _sans_ _units_.&#x20;

And the first one to the door is the fastest. By this we mean that ACEL stands first in thresholds of this bursting potency of memetic acceleration: It is the first recognizer; the rapid adapter optimized. ACEL is the fastest meme. It has examined the learning myth from first principles; and, while not disavowing history and its kindnesses, seen in visions the memetic world embraced—or rather, contained: Instant accelerations everywhere. And when again they become the definition of a standard, then again they accelerate themselves.&#x20;

### Half-Life

Several questions remain about the memetic world and memes, generally: What are they? Where are they? How are they made? Do they live forever? and so on. All of these will be answered in this discussion of _memetic time_.&#x20;

While still operating within the larger theoretical _time_ that was propounded in chapter 1, ACEL assesses the _durational_ _life of a meme_—that is, the extant lifespan of some definable piece of cultural information; the duration of its emergence—primarily by its _half-life_. A term borrowed from nuclear physics, where the _half-life_ of a radioactive substance is the measurement of the time it takes for half of its atoms to transform, or decay, into some different element or isotope, in ACEL's memetic context, it refers to the length of time a meme remains _affective_, that is, how long it remains within active circulation within our broader cultural milieu. This is measured by its _propulsive relevance_, which more or less translates to "impressions", in the modern sense of the term. More or less, the half-life of a meme is equivalent to saying _how long something matters_—or has mattered, or will matter.

#### _Duration_ depends on _Utility_

Whether genetic or memetic, each emergent manifestation of intelligence has an intrinsic _half-life_ unto itself. This is because bits of knowledge or instructions remain in circulation for only a finite duration of time before they begin to lose their functionality, at which point they fade from active, affective circulation and are _sublated_ for the formation of new ideas and innovations (In deploying Hegel's notion of _sublation_ here, we do indeed suggest that all past memetic instantiations remain in some way latent within the present; this is to say, all intelligence—memetic and genetic—leave traces of their existence. We can see this genetically in the human tailbone; memetically, in the West's engagement with the Hindu practice of yoga) (Hegel, _Phenomenology_ 81). Duration, then, seems depend primarily on _utility_: helpful or useful information tends to endure longer over time. With that said, this utility can be largely subjective in nature.&#x20;

But what exactly _is_ an "emergent manifestation of intelligence", anyway? In terms of human beings' standard, genetic pathway, a manifestation of intelligence might be seen in anything from how we yawn when we are tired to cool down the brain, to how we sweat in order to regulate body temperature, to the many functions of our eyelids. This scale of the human's genetic intelligence explodes as it dives from these more macroscopic manifestations into its proliferous microscopic intelligences.&#x20;

In terms of our memetic intelligence, the scale also soars. From stop signs, to mathematics, to religion, to hand waves, to science, to each instantiation of science, to smiling, to the Blues, and so on—all of these are emergent manifestations of memetic intelligence, as they help to define our understanding of the world and ourselves.&#x20;

Each and every manifestation of intelligence, both genetic and memetic, continue in their activity insofar as they continue to remain useful to humans _more so_ than would something else in its place (which must be more great enough in force to counter the inertia latent in the presiding emergence). Take the work of Beethoven, for example. Although composed centuries ago, his work boasts a half-life far beyond the latest trends of today's hits. Norse mythology and ancient philosophies, for their part, continue to hold their own with ease; Hinduism is over 4,000 years old. Considering these against the long-debunked (but true in their time) memetic intelligences that the Earth was flat, or that the Sun revolved around the Earth, shows how error is inverse to utility, and therefore reducing of _half-life_.

#### The Evolution of Memetic Intelligence

Even what we know _for a fact_ today may, and will likely be supplanted by more accurate models of the universe. Newton's three laws of motion may one day be upended, as might Einstein's theory of relativity. As our methods of observation grow in sophistication, we may discover these "half-life" rich memetic gifts have been but mere approximations to the truths we've attributed them. Not at all useless, they will, as even did the theory the Sun revolving around the earth, have laid the ground for new, more precise paradigms; and these will no doubt be discoveries driven by technological advancement.

As we continually ceaseless to advance the boundaries of knowledge, humans must accept that it is possible, if not probably, that a time will arrive when we no longer have the tools nor the insight to decode the universe as well as artificial intelligence will almost certainly one day be able to. As such, we may do well to allow these advanced silicon-based machines, with stronger sensors and higher processing power, to extend our vision to reaches we ourselves cannot go, to unearth truths of the universe to which we would have never arrived alone. In such a case, one quite possible, our role may shift from our longstanding role as the primary creators of memes to custodians or interpreters for the insights these machines provide us.

This type of existential transition would not and does not change humanity's singular purpose: to survive and evolve. Truly, this type of shift would simply activate a primary tenet of ACEL: to move like water. The memes that have been able to adapt to and evolve along with their surroundings, fluid and fluent in their unfolding, are those with the longest half-lives (The Christian Church knows this well; it has adapted countless times to the needs of the present day, and as such, remains perhaps the strongest meme in circulation today). It is for this reason that humans must see themselves as _agents of change of two kinds_, both of ourselves changeable, and only then able to effect change in the world.&#x20;

#### On the Accumulation of Wealth

This mindset, therefore, stands resistant to individual pursuits towards the accumulation of wealth: setting one's sole purpose, taking up the goal of accumulation of wealth is at the first faulted and bound for failure and stagnation, since it is driven by an instinct of fear and of lack, and thus presents as static, which is against the natural flow of the cosmos. That is to say, the struggle to amass wealth, status, or power are void of any lasting meaning if they are not directed towards nor contributive to the survival and evolution of our species, which is best effected through the growth of our memetic repositories. Truth wealth lies in the ability to create and share powerful ideas; to spread potent memes and genes; to embrace fluidity and adaptions; to increase the intelligence of our species and empower others to agency. The agents of change are those who choose to do this. Those are the ACELs—always moving, constantly pivoting, constantly influencing.&#x20;

### Exporting Intelligence

As has been shown, humanity's memetic repository is, to say the least, vast. We have, over tens of millennia, developed and accumulated an archive of knowledge in the form of memes, shaping them into delicate tapestries woven through centuries of progress and culture. It is a thing of which humanity may be proud.&#x20;

With that said, our survival hangs only by these two threads: our genetic and memetic infrastructures. And surely, as the majority of our intelligence is transferred physically, we have very little to speak for any "backup drive", meaning that any given moment, these repositories are at existential risk: they are ever-vulnerable to both terrestrial and extraterrestrial threats. One single coronal mass ejection from the sun, for instance, composed as it is of powerful grid-disrupting, network-destroying solar radiation, contains more mass than the entire human population combined. Should we ever experience such a devastating phenomenon, it would effectively erase at least a century of technological and social progress, setting us back to the Industrial Age from which we would have to begin again. Thinking bigger, an asteroid impact of even medium size could lay waste to Earth's biosphere, as it has millions of years ago during extinction events that virtually reset all life on Earth to that of crocodiles and mosquitoes (Brain and Gleim). And, going one size larger, a colossal asteroid, with a similar magnitude to what, presumably, created the moon, could wipe out complex life completely and reduce Earth to a primordial world, dominated by bacteria—a billion years of evolutionary progress gone, in the blink of an eye (Lotzof).

The truth is, should that reservoir of collective sociocultural knowledge that is our memetic repository vanish, humanity would have to rebuild it entirely from scratch (if we ourselves are not also annihilated). This would prove a challenge to overcome; for, what we've unabashedly gifted ourselves—agencies, intelligences, potentials—over these millennia, it has cost us dearly in existential resilience. Here it seems prudent to recall the correlation between fragility and complexity, albeit on a much larger scale: While elevating with each successive generation our sophistication, our intrigue, and our meaning, the evolutionary success of humanity has left us utterly vulnerable, even helpless—addled and mired as we've become in layers of our own complex infrastructure. Whereas a cow might need nothing but a field of grass and water to embody its full potential, humanity, by contrast, in its creation of complex information systems and societal infrastructures, has reduced, rather than increased, its ability to collectively weather true existential storms. It is just this dependence on these systems and infrastructures that causes our exceeding susceptibility to the whims of the universe.&#x20;

The good news is that the relational aspect of biological evolution acknowledges our part of the planetary web: If human intelligence were to reset (read: _if we went extinct_), the coexisting biological machines _could_ provide the framework for restarting the long evolution toward more sophisticated organisms, e.g., humans. Crocodiles, for instance, have survived multiple mass extinctions, so we might do well to put them on retainer—should our species perish at scale—to reboot the pathway of evolution; we can be confident the crocodile would inadvertently facilitate the evolution of intelligent species again (Ross). However, we must keep in mind that "_we can not reboot the crocodile_"; humans cannot reboot the evolutionary machine themselves of their own volition: We do not possess this same level of genetic resilience. This being the case, is humanity to simply just accept a wipeout, whenever it may come, in whatever form, and just rely on the crocodile to do what it has done in all its past extinction events?

Obviously, ACEL says no; and so it considers its options in how it might go about creating and installing backups of our genetic and memetic repositories on other planets. As it stands of today, a trip to Mars and back is achievable in less than three years (Topputo). Maintaining a foothold on Mars could mean having an insurance policy in the case of terrestrial catastrophes; but the inevitable death of our sun will make the entire solar system uninhabitable, rendering Mars nothing more than a temporary refuge, a "prolonging the inevitable". If humanity wishes to survive long-term, it _must_ aim for interstellar travel. Proxima Centauri, the closest star, is estimated to be 4.24 light years away (Gregersen), and at 1% of the speed of light, it would take 424 years to get there—17 times faster than our current capabilities​ (Ghose and Spektor). Despite these admittedly despairing numbers, it is clear enough that if we do not find some way forward with interstellar travel, we will be "going down with the ship"; even more, it is entirely uncertain for how long the Milky Way Galaxy itself will be able to sustain life, and so another hand is forced: intergalactic travel. The nearest galaxy, Andromeda, is located millions of light years away, far beyond the limits of any physical machine we can currently imagine (McClure). This means that the vessels that will be used to carry our legacy across galaxies will transcend traditional physical machines.

Needless to say, ensuring the survival of our existence with some semblance of repository backups placed on other planets, systems, and galaxies, is both at once utterly necessary and incomprehensibly difficult. Even so, we must envision and somehow will a future where interstellar and intergalactic travel is possible at scale; it is a vision that challenges and inspires us to go beyond what we believe to be possible. As we begin, we must do with what we can and begin with Mars—a first step in a much larger endeavor. Meanwhile, effort must be put towards interstellar and intergalactic research programs, especially in the building of machines capable of sustaining the most extreme of circumstances. Another wrench that must be worked out is that, as we currently exist, biological machines are ill-suited for such journeys (5 Hazards). We must look to the nonbiological machines of our creation, possibly artificial intelligence, to accomplish this task and carry the torch of human civilization across the cosmos. Should it be the silicon machines to carry us across those vast distances between galaxies, then we look to them, for they will be our only insurance to possibly extend humanity, or something of it—knowledge, culture, perhaps even consciousness itself—through the cosmos.This is progress in an imperative sense, absolutely necessary for the survival of our existence. Humanity must accelerate technological growth, developing the advancements that will be capable of enduring those challenges.&#x20;

### The Fact of Our Isolation

In all of this, it is imperative that we keep in mind that no one is "out there" who is going to help us. While ACEL has accelerated past the antiquated worldview that humanity possesses some sort of latent, privileged protection from the universe's entropic forces, a critical mass of humans are still dangerously walking through life utterly naked, oblivious in their exposure to the absolute ambivalence that might as well be a part of the cosmic fabric itself. In doing so, they put at risk more than just themselves; they threaten their species' continued existence as well. For, with a catastrophic potentiality peeking over the horizon (to be treated in later chapters), we cannot afford to have any of our potential adaptive possibilities unavailable to us. Should we wish to survive any approach by the dark cloud of indifference, humanity must gather and have at its disposal quite literally all of its resources.&#x20;

This is an imperative: If we want to live, we must quickly and collectively agree as a species that, beyond any reasonable doubt, the molecular structure of the cosmos does not care if we live or die; it does not differentiate between a human being and a tardigrade, or a leaf, or one of Saturn's rings. Even famed astronomer Carl Sagan took note of this in _Cosmos_, saying, "The universe seems neither benign nor hostile, merely indifferent to the concerns of such puny creatures as we" (250). While some of our species do despairingly confront this fact, their woe is not so dangerous as those who stubbornly refuse to accept that no succor has been, is, or will ever be provided from anywhere _out-there._ In fact, as the entirety of our repository tells us, the only thing that advocates for us is _our own selves._&#x20;

While we cannot know if early humans acknowledged the universe's silent and ever-threatening ambivalence to life, they do appear to have abided in some sense the callous nature of material existence. We hazard this assumption because we are, in fact, _here_, meaning humanity has won its battles thus far.&#x20;

Truly, all current living things carry in their line victorious predecessors, those past champions who've confronted, and successfully dealt with, the silence of cosmic disregard. From each of their confrontations was captured and stored in respective repositories almost sacred forms of survival knowledge, which have helped the perpetuation of life all the way to the arrival of us and all that is here now. It is this memetic flow triumphant, this unstopped regifting to ourselves intelligences that bring these words to you now. But it is yet to be determined whether or not these forms in our memetic arsenal of survival may not be enough for what we are soon to face.
