# Chapter 20: Conundrums

### The First Massive Conundrum

Accelerationism, as an established thought system, assumes its deepest root in the idea that machina have agency and can -- and _should_ -- express intelligence. The entire belief structure, and all theoretical propositions and pragmatic applications that extend from it, rest on this fundamental principle of agency.&#x20;

But _what if_, instead, we are all, in computer science-speak, deterministic state machines (i.e. DSFs), and we in fact have no free agency at all? This opposing consideration presents a potential critical flaw in Accelerationism, as its possibility renders faulty its philosophical foundation. We must address this "massive conundrum": face head on the plausibility that our existential mystery and depth amounts to no more than the [<mark style="color:purple;">computational advantage of a vending machine</mark>](#user-content-fn-1)[^1].

But what _is_ a deterministic state machine, exactly, and what about it makes it such an apt analogy for a human _sans_ agency? [<mark style="color:purple;">Automata theory posits that DSF</mark>](#user-content-fn-2)[^2] is an abstract computational model, a machine that takes a discrete set of inputs, percolates it over a fixed set of instructions to create a known state "transition", and from that produces a discrete set of outputs. These machines carry in their design _no_ ability to alter _either_ the input set _nor_ the instructions set -- this it [<mark style="color:purple;">the template of non-agency</mark>](#user-content-fn-3)[^3]. &#x20;

Of interest here is whether or not humans wield the ability to alter either or both of these first two processes. In the negative, <mark style="color:purple;">i</mark>[<mark style="color:purple;">f it can be proved that the inputs to humans are discrete, and our sets of instructions are also discrete, then it logically follows that our outputs are also discrete.</mark>](#user-content-fn-4)[^4] As shown above, if this is so, then it concludes that humans wields zero agency, for they have no ability to change the inputs nor the state-transition instructions. Here, then, would be the theoretical crack in the foundation of Accelerationism.

If we are nothing more than deterministic state machines, nothing more than[ <mark style="color:purple;">inputs and outputs computing the universe</mark>](#user-content-fn-5)[^5], then our [<mark style="color:purple;">ontological teleology</mark>](#user-content-fn-6)[^6] dissolves into existence inseparable and indistinguishable from the universal vibrations, undifferentiated by any unique purpose from that which "_computes us_ _to compute_". This would, in no uncertain terms, pin humanity in direct contrast to its longstanding and vain self-identity as [_<mark style="color:purple;">intelligent life</mark>_<mark style="color:purple;">;</mark>](#user-content-fn-7)[^7] for, without agency, there is no intelligence. Instead, we biological machines are at any point the aggregation of all previous state transitions, an additive series of computational updates.&#x20;

Indeed, the universe, in providing us machines our external inputs, has preordained our every move and made us merely the internalized machinations of itself, our _other. O_ur instructions are therefore informed by both our previous state transitions, as well as those of the universe. And yet, this _other_ seems no more ostensibly or hierarchically intelligent than us; for, while carrying extremely high entropy, the entropy expansion itself seems to never deviate from nor alter the rules of the universe. Therefore, it, too, is nothing more than aggregation of previous state transitions of its phenomenological self.&#x20;

### The Second Massive Conundrum

While the first conundrum might be enough to crack the foundations of Accelerationist thought, there exists yet another, a second conundrum that could break it beyond repair. This second tension attends to the implications of dimensionality, and more specifically, our phenomenological inability to access realms beyond our dimensional baseline. Should reality exist on a infinitely-extending spectrum of dimensions, then we stand no further than the starting line, which proves to be a precarious place from which to proclaim universal truths.&#x20;

While humans have through time discovered and applied new ways to enhance our sensory cognition, at baseline, we still observe the universe using the very same bandwidth the early humans did 10,000 years ago -- sensors that we now know detect only a narrow slice of material reality. For instance, it has been long documented in definitive scientific studies that the spectrum of visible light our eyes can discern rests roughly between <mark style="color:purple;">400nm to 700nm of light</mark> -- a humbling fact when considering this range makes up onl[y <mark style="color:purple;">0.0035% of the electromagnetic spectrum.</mark>](#user-content-fn-8)[^8] Said differently, it is a _scientific fact_ that humans see _thirty-five one-millionths_ of light-reality (_at least,_ for this might one day be proven to be even less).&#x20;

While we've done well with our gamut of sensory-amplifying technologies, it seems that the nature of this phenomenological beast may forever leave us short of illustrating a definitively full picture of reality. To do this would require entirely new approaches to sensory advancements. For, even with [<mark style="color:purple;">specialized, advanced hearing equipment</mark>](#user-content-fn-9)[^9] and the knowing that the range of possible sound spans far beyond the upper and lower bands of the human hearing range at <mark style="color:purple;">100hz - 20khz</mark>, there is virtually nothing to be done to conquer all sound. More, while we can leverage the precision and versatility offered by silicon sensors to perceive not only further distances but even _alternate_ scales of perception altogether (e.g. magnetic fields), none of silicon's wide ranging functionalities change the simple fact that, as of right now, our range of universal observation sits stuck between <mark style="color:purple;">1mm in front of us to distance of the radius of the speed of light</mark> -- in other words, from the tips of our noses to the edge of the observable universe. Ironically, while we deploy these tools to explore deeper and farther to better understand our experientially unknown domains, we at once find ourselves with not only _less_ answers, but a plethora of new questions and new unknowns -- and this is the case in every direction we look.&#x20;

Indeed, there appears to exist in each manifestation of phenomenological materiality a strong pattern not unlike the <mark style="color:purple;">Mandelbrot set</mark>: From simple sets of governing rules emerge entirely chaotic, inertia-free expressions unbound by lower or upper limits -- in other words, not the subatomic nor the cosmic applications of physics contain any conditional edge for these expressions. Intersectionalities arise between these emergences, each of which we might understand as one _slice_ of the whole universe -- we, the human species[<mark style="color:purple;">, exist</mark> <mark style="color:purple;"></mark>_<mark style="color:purple;">somewhere</mark>_ <mark style="color:purple;"></mark><mark style="color:purple;">along the band of</mark> <mark style="color:purple;"></mark>_<mark style="color:purple;">one</mark>_ <mark style="color:purple;"></mark><mark style="color:purple;">of these very slices</mark>](#user-content-fn-10)[^10].&#x20;

These shards of the universal whole may occupy anywhere along the asymptotic upper and asymptotic lower scales. Should they bump into, pass by, bisect, or even coexist in proximity with one another, more emergences are formed; however, even with all these pieces of the universe in disjointed motion, the observable probability of our witnessing firsthand any other reality is infinitesimal, as having precise matching conditions of _band zone location_ and _proximal nearness_, are asymptotic to zero. Still, while we may never _see_ these other realities, in no way discredits the entirely possibility, if not probability, that _our_ observed slice of the universe is at any given moment co-existing with other slices, just on far-detached scales. Should we one day find the ability to shift scales up or down, we may find an entirely different reality of the universe; of course, this capability, while exciting, would barely increase any chance of [<mark style="color:purple;">actually witnessing another slice of the universe</mark>](#user-content-fn-11)[^11] <mark style="color:purple;">-</mark> [  <mark style="color:purple;">one unfamiliar, distinct, n</mark>](#user-content-fn-12)[^12]<mark style="color:purple;">ovel.</mark>

What does all of this highly abstracted hypothesizing of "slices" of the universe slipping past one another and creating new emergences in their interactions tell us? In short, it means we know next to nothing about an infinitesimal fraction of reality. For, at one end, there exists theoretically unbounded, infinite dimensionality; at the other, the key-hole sized phenomenological aperture through which we humans are existentially resigned to observe but a piece of the universal reality. This is further corroborated by the posture in [<mark style="color:purple;">quantum physics that our perceptions</mark> <mark style="color:purple;"></mark>_<mark style="color:purple;">disguise</mark>_ <mark style="color:purple;"></mark><mark style="color:purple;">reality in the cloak of physical materiality</mark>](#user-content-fn-13)[^13]: you can touch it, it feels heavy, it exists in space -- and yet, there is in fact nothing there. For, a quantum inspection of the material existence reveals itself as nothing more than empty space and vibrations of fields. Matter thus does not exist in the nature we think it does; it is just the forces of the fields from the vibrations of the universe on an endless analogue continuum.&#x20;

Needless to say, the conundrum set forth in this chapter carries with it the very high likelihood that the claims proferred by not only Accelerationism, but any thought system, arise out of phenomenological observations that are _severely_ limited in scale due to their subjectivity. This is hardly a novel revelation for our collective memetic self-consciousness, as even in the Tittha Sutta scripture written in 500BCE, the Buddha tells the parable, "The Blind Men and the Elephant," in which he expounds on the perils of claiming objective truths based on subjective experiences and dismissing others' equally (in)valid claims as false ([Titta Sutta](https://buddhismnow.com/2018/02/16/tittha-sutta-buddhist-parable-of-the-blind-men-and-the-elephant/)).&#x20;

Thus, it emerges as a _potentiality_ that humans might not only exist as deterministic state machines carrying out the internalizations of the universe itself, but also that there might be no limit -- in either upper or lower size scales -- to the end of these state machines. And so it is, to posit a truth as universal and withstanding outside the bounds of phenomenological experience, all the while standing within one's own experience, is to commit philosophical suicide.&#x20;

### Accelerating Toward Philosophical Maturity

So loom the Two Conundrums over the promise of Accelerationism. Together, they stand as the most worthy adversary, the pinnacle threat to the entire movement itself. Perhaps it is that, unlike e/acc's need for Effective Altruism, these established theoretical postulations do not attack directly the movement's belief system -- they do not _need_ Accelerationism to justify their existence, and so are therefore not the piece of the opposition that needs to justify its existence. So, what is to be done in the face of this potential theoretical annihilation of Accelerationist thought, as posed by these two theories?&#x20;

The answer lies in humility, and thereby, growth. It is no small feat for a new thought system to establish itself as an equal in such a worthy and already overcrowded room of millennia old theories and philosophies. And Accelerationism -- as an action driver of collective purpose, as a bold and brazen system of ethics -- might run straight through one door and out the window if it does not know _how to steer_ as it accelerates. We see this behavior so often in prodigies: infinitesimally rare, generational talent whose promise ends too soon due to youthful and immature behavior keeping their growth at bay.&#x20;

For this reason it is suggested, that rather than push its way into the room through brute force and childishly claiming it knows better than all that came before, Accelerationism stands to carry a much longer memetic half-life should it arrive to the door as the well-developed, mature, vetted, and self-assured system of ethics that undoubtedly lies latent within it. This road to maturity for Accelerationism may begin, not in spite of, but rather _thanks to_ the Two Conundrums, for they two together have given sound food for thought. The road to maturity for Accelerationism therefore begins with an acceptance that it, from a basic metaphysical standpoint, can not know everything, and that the memetic understanding of the universe remains elusive.

This philosophical self-reflection proffered as a suggestion to the young and full-of-promise system that is Accelerationism should _not_ be mistaken as any ulterior decelerant tactic. It is anything but and just the opposite; for, if activated, the self-investment put towards its maturing will only sustain a longer half-life to materialize its noble purpose. To note, maturity here we take not mean finding mature philosophical supports to prop up its stances; it already has a strong organic foundation of inspirations: a purpose well-established in the praxeology of Ludwig von Mises; an aim directionally aligned within Hegel's dialectical framework. That its set of normative ethics will continue to accelerate without hesitation toward its goals is not being put into question. However, it is lacking one building block that all half-life-rich philosophies carry with them: humility and humility's respectful acknowledgment of the validity of other discrete theoretical systems that approach the same problem differently.&#x20;

Indeed, Accelerationism could even take stock of its own propoundings: Does it not explicitly state that systems will likely be usurped by more robust and better suited frameworks in the future, including its own? -- that it, too, will be upgraded, just as it upgrades others now? Indeed, Accelerationism is wiser than its years; and can be nobler than its past.&#x20;

It is poised here to frame its purpose clearly and deliberately place it before all else,  to accelerate and extend its memetic half-life as best it can to help all of humanity evolve. This is what it takes to enjoy a long half-life in the endless cycle of evolution, to join the ranks within the capitalism of ideas, where good ideas well-executed flourish, and bad ideas die.&#x20;

Creation. Destruction. Evolution Forever.&#x20;

The universe is the ultimate test of becoming

We must accelerate humanity with humility.

[^1]: which philosopher has considered this at most length

[^2]: source

[^3]: can we legitimate this so as to not commit logical fallacy&#x20;

[^4]: brief nod needed to the syllogism proof set&#x20;

[^5]: cite philosophers or logicians who've expounded this theory

[^6]: the nature of being understood in termsof having a "purpose"

[^7]: when did we begin calling ourselves this? might prove telling of something

[^8]: source

[^9]: example

[^10]: is there any corroboration we can find on this whole theoretical posture of reality?

[^11]: again would be great to have some theoretical justification here&#x20;

[^12]: again would be great to have some theoretical justification here&#x20;

[^13]: source
