---
description: >-
  "Our brains are bigger, to be sure, but it is mainly due to their infestation
  by memes that they gain their powers" - Dan Dennett, "The Evolution of
  Culture"
layout:
  title:
    visible: true
  description:
    visible: true
  tableOfContents:
    visible: true
  outline:
    visible: true
  pagination:
    visible: true
---

# Chapter 3: Memesis: The New Dominant Intelligence

### Deploying Our Natural Appetite for Knowledge

For all of the evolutionary mechanisms that have shaped and reshaped human biological systems over our species' extant millennia, it is the manifest complexity of the brain — particularly the frontal lobe, the sensory cortex, and the hippocampus (just some of the neural structures determining how our brain seeks out, processes, and retains information) — that has turned humans into exploratory powerhouses (de Villiers; Jacobson et al.).

That humans wield the planet's the most complex hippocampus (this being the seat of compulsion to learn), our species asserts unparalleled ranges of agency, amplitudes and amperages away in our need to seek out and acquire knowledge. Another way of putting this is we are the biological machine _most programmed to be curious;_ we are also the best hardwired to gratify that curiosity. This is because within our Limbic System — a system consisting of the Hippocampus, Cingulate Gyrus, Thalamus, and the Basal Ganglia — resides a more or less inexhaustible, infinite reservoir of memory: infinite, if not for the finite body in which it is housed (Shapiro et al.).&#x20;

From this last reflection comes manifest a pressure, an intensity born of finitude that moves one to act in frameworks of optimism. Resonating with the concept of "post-traumatic growth" in the field of psychology (Turner et al.), this reckoning with mortality is but one mode of inspiration by which one arrives to ACEL, to a more intimate engagement with, a more direct and earnest activation of the latent potentials within one's agency. Which cadence one's agency takes from here, whatever the genre of their manifestation, all is in every case propelled memetically forward by the individual's self-contained, deliberately-aimed active will: each curious step taken across the memetic topography is a _toward-intelligence, toward-knowledge_, ergot _toward-evolution._&#x20;

The memes one scoops up or drops like pollen or seeds along the way are, by nature, sticky, contagious "like viruses" (Dennett 4); one's simple walking along the learning path becomes itself a memetic world market whereby others too, whether intentionally or not (possibly even unconsciously), will enter the memetic exchange with you by proxy as your paths come into a shared range (we'll see later how the mediums of these paths are of zero importance) (Dennett 4). Such is our memetic evolution by intentional, yet minimally efforted intelligence carried out. It happens simply because we _move_.&#x20;

Additionally, as a self-aware agent extending out in relational lines, equipping more agency to oneself with each effected acquisition from and contribution to our collective memetic repository, we also possess within us a potent opportunity to _effortfully_ _evolutionize_ our species: that we may strategically, deliberately take our neurological blueprint _further_, accelerate ourselves into a galactic memetic repository to the nth degree. This accelerated, _only_-directional (as it moves towards its purpose _only_) compounding of our curiosity-born intelligence and our will-driven agency -- drums the steady beat of greatest _purpose_ through our biological givens that we cannot extinguish until we ourselves are.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                &#x20;

And why would we want to temper our body's organic will-to-learn, anyhow? As our body, being a gift to which we have temporary access, is formed in a way so as to have no ceiling to our capacity for intelligence, we must focus all of our efforts on feeding our appetite for knowledge; we are, quite literally, made to be learners. Such is why ACEL deems intelligence as its "output": because we can, we _must._ American philosopher Dan Dennett's reflection on memes as, "spreading simply because they could spread," is reminiscent of just this: as with the units of cultural knowledge, just so with their human carrier agents (9). As with memes, so are we, and so we are. In accepting and activating this role within ourselves, we _directly_ accelerate the evolution of our species; and, considering the finite nature of embodiment, we must prioritize above all an adherence to _efficiency_ in our pursuit of all intelligence.

### Navigating Memetic Metric Challenges

To this end of efficiency, the first thing accelerant seekers of knowledge must attend to is the theoretical mechanisms by which humans amass, retain, and transfer memetic knowledge; for, only if we know the machine can we most efficaciously apply our agency upon it. Immediately, however, an issue arises here: there is no formally-accepted unit of measurement in cultural evolution studies by which to quantify cultural/memetic knowledge. In other words, how are we to know if we are indeed, maximizing our potential? UPenn biologist Marco Smolla noted of this, that it is, "so tricky to find a useful concept of units of evolution in cultural evolution (a unit might be the single cultural trait or a set of traits, but also the carrier of a trait, etc.) (Smolla et al. 6).&#x20;

As such, we must choose one of two routes: either, 1) at substantial theoretical risk, compose some semblance of model where "knowable" information — that is, any available information that a given human may or may not know yet — is compartmentalized into quantifiable units so that their transference may be aggregated. With a system of knowledge-measurement in place, humans will be shown to _accelerate_ against a standardized backdrop of data. Or, 2) we might forego the attempt at a formula or loss-function altogether, and accept that the nature of cultural evolution studies is simply _too immediate_, _too everywhere_, _too always_ to fit in any given mathematical formula. Before deciding, we'll move through some historical and contemporary frameworks, and then decide a course of action.&#x20;

### The Promise of Cultural Evolution Studies

We have had one such model of measurement for well over a century: Ever since Danish botanist Wilhelm Johannsen published his seminal study on the hereditary traits of plants in 1909, wherein he neologized the term "gene" (as well as "genotype" and "phenotype"), our species has long and ubiquitously accepted that genes are _the_ repository of evolutionary blueprints, including that of humans (Rolls-Hansen). The _gene_ thus provides a working model for a unit of knowledge-measurement. But what of non-biological knowledge, and its transference? That Johannsen's plants did not have a cultural repository: does that mean we don't, either?

While Charles Darwin expounded notions antecedent and foundational to contemporary cultural evolution studies in his 1871 work, _The Descent of Man, and Selection in Relation to Sex_ (Darwin)_,_ it wasn't until 1976 when Richard Dawkins published _The Selfish Gene_ that the gap of non-biological knowledge was sufficiently accounted for and filled. In this groundbreaking and still critically acclaimed book, Dawkins delineates a theoretical  process wherein a discrete set of evolutionary data is selected — he terms that which has been chosen, the _replicator —_ and then copied and transferred along an evolutionary _line_ or _pathway_. For both variables in said model, the replicator and the line, Dawkins claims there are not one, but _two of each: two_ families of replicators that travel on _two_ respective and distinct pathways. These are: 1) biological replicators: _genes_, and the genetic pathway; and 2) cultural replicators: _memes_, and the memetic pathway (Dawkins 19, 124, 140, 144). Dawkins surmises that, while "genes" are the units of biological evolution, "memes" are the units of cultural evolution; and both move through processes of vetting and selection towards existential continuity (Dawkins 195).

Dawkins' bimodal model of evolutionary data flow thus opened a way to account for both a human's genetic intelligence as well as their cultural, learned intelligence. With such a head start, however, Johannsen's genes for some time held a dominant, residual lordship over Dawkins' memes in terms of evolutionary influence — that is, until fairly recently. In fact, this cultural quantum of data, the "meme", has all but taken the throne from biological material with regards to knowledge acquisition and evolutionary influence. University of Maine researchers Timothy Waring et al. corroborate this stance in their 2021 study, where their published findings show that "'... the importance of culture... is surpassing the value of genes as the primary driver of human evolution... We evolve both genetically and culturally over time, but we are slowly becoming ever more cultural and ever less genetic'," (Waring et al.). &#x20;

In their publication, Waring et al. state their reasoning for this memetic eclipse of genetics in evolutionary impact, for why now "... \[culture] is a stronger mechanism of adaptation." This is due to culture's outperformance of genetics in _three_ key areas: 1)  _speed_; 2) a "_group-learn_" functionality (an area that genetics altogether lacks); and, 3), _flexibility_ (Waring et al.). Of the first, _speed_, they find that, "\[Culture is] faster: gene transfer occurs only once a generation, while cultural practices can be rapidly learned and frequently updated" (Waring et al.). Of the second, culture's "group-learn" component, Waring claims, "Factors like conformity, social identity and shared norms and institutions — factors that have no genetic equivalent... \[make] 'culturally organized groups appear to solve adaptive problems more readily than individuals, through the compounding value of social learning and cultural transmission in groups'" (Waring et al.). Biologist Marco Smolla of UPenn understands these two pockets of attributive cultural influence - e.g. "speed" and "group-learn" — as composite to what he calls the _continuous acquisition_ element of culture.  He states in a co-published 2020 study that "culture is acquired sequentially through a combination of episodes of social learning... and individual practice;" as this makes "the individual an active force in the transmission... Cultural evolution can proceed much faster than biological evolution, both in rate of change and in terms of trait complexity" (Smolla et al. 4, 5). From these claims we can begin to see that researchers are noting heretofore unacknowledged lines of efficiency in memetic learning that we do not see in genetic learning.&#x20;

Per memetic flexibility, Waring states, "Culture is also more flexible than genes: gene transfer is rigid and limited to... two parents, while cultural transmission is based on flexible human learning and effectively unlimited with the ability to make use of information from peers and experts far beyond parents. As a result, cultural evolution is a stronger type of adaptation than old genetics" (Waring et al.). Smolla says of memetic flexibility, "In biological evolution, information (genetic traits) is encoded in... the sequence of physical molecular structures... By contrast, in cultural evolution, cultural information... takes the form of mental representations... encoded as neuronal connections in the brain... \[so,] an individual cannot change its genome, but can make changes to the composition of its cultural traits" (Smolla et al. 3). Additionally, Smolla says, "while genes can be frequently and accurately accessed and copied, there are very limited possibilities of passing information to the genome that can be inherited by offspring. By contrast, mental representations cannot be directly observed or copied, but due to the high flexibility of the nervous system, mental representations can be continuously altered before they are exhibited and transmitted to others" (Smolla et al. 3).&#x20;

And so we find — in its continuous giving, its inexhaustible variability, its shared compounding — our El Dorado of knowledge, our virtually infinite learning reservoir, in memes.&#x20;

### Memes > Genes

It is hardly new to accept that culture, its memetic transmission, has an impact on what we know. It is a different thing altogether to see scholars finally in an agreeance that the elastic nature of cultural data holds in it _more_ substantive impacts and potentialities, most still untapped or unknown, than its genetic counterpart. Waring states, "Increasingly... human adaptations are steered by culture, and require genes to accommodate," because, "...the vast majority of intelligence, its seeking out, acquisition, and retention, now passes primarily through the memetic pathway" (Waring et al.).&#x20;

Thus it is, that in the context of our postmodern world, where genetics has become all but a code-based passenger in the car of human evolution, our intelligence, our progress as a species has become, according to professional opinion, more dependent on memes over genes; memes have taken the wheel. As such, they shall be, at least according to ACEL, the evolutionary data set we prioritize and leverage in optimizing humanity's future.&#x20;

This — our species' shift in prioritizing memetic intelligence over genetic intelligence — is a simple, if not inadvertent, matter of evolution itself. While our baseline genetic material was formed over ten millennia ago and does continue to evolve, it is overshadowed by the momentous, world-changing societal developments of the past few hundred years (Templeton). We have dominated our environment to where our biological needs are far outweighed by our cultural needs; and, when outlying cases do arise, our medical and technological innovations are by and large capable of saving lives (Zampieri). These innovations have also all but eliminated our biological need, our evolutionary necessity to consider genetic health when choosing a reproductive partner (Zampieri). All this together, if it were the case that we truly did have only one evolutionary pathway — that is, if it were only Johannsen's genetic pathway by which we transferred information — then we have all but already begun the slow collapse of our evolutionary road, and could be destined to remain the same or even a regressed species one millennia from now.&#x20;

As might Dawkins, Accelerationism refuses this fate, for the omnipresence of memes is too staggering an empirical data set -- even without a unit of measurement — to turn a blind eye, especially an eye attuned to latent potency and potentiality; these memes are flying, always, everywhere, always growing, always transforming themselves and teaching along every line traveled, all that they pass by or pass through. The frenzied life, the possible worlds in them, to the accelerator, leaves any chance of a crude, dull-witted submission to genetic determinism impossible to accept. Says the accelerator, there something buzzes in memes that needs peeling back — the desire to learn from that which we learn.&#x20;

While what we see underneath is not quantifiable — that no metric yet exists to plot points on a graph or to derive some formula, perhaps we may find that memes are nonetheless containable without numbers, so long as we have a deliberately composed and precise theoretical framework. We may borrow terminology and models from Dawkins for this, as well as other systems of thought (that are treated throughout this book), to create such a grounding so that we may begin to understand how memetic intelligence is prioritized, amalgamated, and passed from biological machine to biological machine. Only then, can we begin to truly and effectively _accelerate_ that process and catapult our evolutionary potential beyond what we thought was possible.&#x20;

Most importantly, we must start this effort now. For only now, a century later after Johannsen gave us that admittedly _accelerated-for-the-era_ discovery of plant genotypes and phenotypes, do humans seem to be washing off its residual, unintended ownership of, not the way we learn, but of the way we think we learn, and the false bounds by which the discovery of genetics has, until Dawkins, largely fettered us away from knowledge reservoirs unbound, our El Dorado. For memes are, through the form and function by which they move through any medium whatsoever, educative, and by that, harnessable, even sans units. And the first one to the door is the fastest. By this we mean that ACEL stands first in thresholds of this bursting potency of memetic acceleration: It is the first recognizer; the rapid adapter optimized. ACEL is the fastest meme. It has examined the learning myth from first principles; and, while not disavowing history and its kindnesses, seen in visions the memetic world embraced — or rather, contained: Instant accelerations everywhere. And when again they become the definition of a standard, then again they accelerate themselves.&#x20;

### Half-Life

Whether genetic or memetic, intelligence has an intrinsic "half-life"; knowledge or instructions are only helpful for a particular duration of time, before they begin losing their functionality. They fade over time, to give way to new ideas and innovations, but still manage to leave traces of their existence.&#x20;

Earlier genetic instructions in human DNA demonstrate one of the most fundamental principles regarding the "half-life" of intelligence: helpful information tends to endure longer over time. Our DNA serves as somewhat of an encyclopedia of life's history retaining instructions that have made it through millennia by being necessary for survival. Much like the roots of a tree anchoring it deep in the earth, these genetic instructions can be seen as the very foundation from which humanity grew.&#x20;

Yet, much like the leaves that remain on trees, some of these traits become useless with the changing environment and evolving species, slowly fading into insignificance—leaving remnants behind. Regardless, these remnants survive, creating a legacy that hints about previous times. For example, the gene for synthesizing vitamin C in humans is now a pseudogene; and although it is no longer functional, it's presence reminds one of an evolutionary journey that began in a world full of dietary sources of vitamin C.&#x20;

**memes intro?**

Memes—the cultural equivalent of genes—also have a "half-life". These cultural artifacts define our understanding of the world and ourselves: art, music, mathematics, science, and religion. Similarly to genes, they are also subject to pressure by utility or relevance.&#x20;

**good ideas**

Take the work of Beethoven for example, although composed centuries ago, it poses a half-life far beyond the fleeting bits that make up most of today's popular music. Old scriptures such as Norse mythology and ancient philosophies, while their direct influence may vary, are permanently etched in some way in our collective consciousness. They are a base from which modern thought is launched—much like ancient ruins that give an inkling of the great civilizations of previous times.&#x20;

**wrong ideas**

The journey of human advancement is marked by the replacement of outdated memes with more advanced ones. The once-dominant belief that the Earth was flat, or that the Sun revolved around the Earth, illustrates the short "half-life" of erroneous ideas. These beliefs were supplanted by more accurate models of the universe, driven by technological advancements—like telescopes—which allowed for precise observations.&#x20;

**good but evolved into outdated ideas**

Towering figures in the annals of scientific thought, such as Sir Isaac Newton and Albert Einstein, contributed memes of extraordinary potency. Newton's three laws of motion and the theory of relativity proposed by Einstein have endured for centuries; and yet, as our methods of observation grow in sophistication, we may discover these "half-life" rich memetic gifts but mere approximations to the truths we've attributed them, and so lay the ground for new, more precise paradigms,

**shifting role, we are outdated by silicon**

As we strive to further the boundaries of knowledge, humans must accept that there will probably come a time when we may not have the tools or insight to decode the universe wholly. To accomplish such a feat, we may have to leave this task up to advanced silicon-based machines with stronger sensors and higher processing power. Advancements such as Artificial Intelligence could be utilized to unearth truths that would allow us to revision our memetic repository. Our role may shift from primary creators of memes to custodians or interpreters for the insights these machines provide us.

**purpose to survive**,&#x20;

Ultimately, the true purpose of humanity is to yield memes and genes that survive and prevail. Our current struggles to amass wealth, status, or power mean nothing if they don't help in contributing to our repositories. Thus, individuals who perceive value accumulation as their sole purpose are bound to stagnate in life, likely shutting themselves out of fear. The ones who choose to spread potent memes and genes embrace fluidity and adaptions. Those are the Acels--always moving, constantly pivoting, constantly influencing.&#x20;

**powerful ideas is what matters**

The Acels are the agents of change; knowing full well that the real wealth lies in the ability to create and share powerful ideas. They are not attached or held back by their resources but utilize them in a manner that bring innovation and leverage. Their wealth is fluid; it flows effortlessly through time, effort, value, and intelligence.&#x20;

**back to dark ages?**

Humanity has accumulated knowledge in the form of memes, shaping them into delicate tapestries woven through centuries of progress and culture. These repositories are at risk, vulnerable to both terrestrial and extra terrestrial threats. A single coronal mass ejection from the sun contains more mass than the entire human population combined. It is composed of powerful solar radiation that disrupts electrical grids and communication networks. In short, it could plunge us back to the Industrial Age, wiping out at least a century of technological and social progress.

### Exporting Intelligence

As we stand, an asteroid impact of even medium size could lay waste to the biosphere, as it has during extinction events that reset life to crocodiles and mosquitoes, millions of years ago. ([Marshall Brain](https://science.howstuffworks.com/nature/natural-disasters/asteroid-hits-earth.htm)) A colossal asteroid, with a similar magnitude to what -presumably- created the moon ([Giant-impact model](https://www.nhm.ac.uk/discover/how-did-the-moon-form.html)) , could wipe out complex life completely and reduce Earth to a primordial world, dominated by bacteria -- a billion years of evolutionary progress gone, in the blink of an eye.

The prevalence and success of humanity has made us more capable and, at the same time, more vulnerable; we have become more sophisticated and helpless through every human generation--dependent on intricate systems of infrastructure. This very dependance is what makes us exceedingly susceptible to the whims of the universe.  Our genetic and memetic heritage could be safeguarded on a different planet; as it stands in this day and age, a trip to Mars and back is achievable in less than three years ([F. Topputo](https://home.aero.polimi.it/topputo/data/uploads/papers/articles/article-2015-3.pdf)). Maintaining a foothold on mars could mean having an insurance policy in the case of terrestrial catastrophes.&#x20;

Yet, even Mars is but a temporary refuge. The inevitable death of our sun will make the entire solar system uninhabitable. If humanity wants to survive long-term, we must aim for interstellar travel. Proxima Centauri, the closest star, is estimated to be 4.24 light years away ([Britannica](https://www.britannica.com/story/how-do-we-know-how-far-away-the-stars-are)), and at 1% of the speed of light, it would take 424 years to get there—17 times faster than our current capabilities​ ([Parker Solar Probe](https://www.livescience.com/space/nasas-parker-solar-probe-smashes-record-for-fastest-man-made-object)). Even beyond all of this, the ultimate destiny that our galaxy will impose on us will be forcing us to contemplate intergalactic travel. The nearest galaxy is far beyond the limits of any physical machine we can currently imagine, Andromeda, located millions of light years away. ([Earthsky](https://earthsky.org/clusters-nebulae-galaxies/andromeda-galaxy-closest-spiral-to-milky-way/)) This means that the vessels that will be used to carry our legacy across galaxies will transcend traditional physical machines. As humanity increasingly becomes a cohesive whole, dependent on the complications that we build, our vulnerability to the cosmic grows. This journey is more than academics, it is an imperative progression, necessary for the survival of our existence. Humanity needs to accelerate technological growth, developing the advancements that will be capable of enduring those challenges.&#x20;

In simple terms, to ensure the survival of our existence, we must create backups of our genetic and memetic repositories on other planets. The most feasible of these is Mars--this will be the first step in a much larger endeavor. Interstellar and intergalactic travel demands machines that will tolerate the most extreme of circumstances. As we exist, biological machines are ill-suited for such journeys ([NASA](https://www.nasa.gov/hrp/hazards/)). We must look to non-biological machines, possibly artificial intelligence, to accomplish this task and carry the torch of human civilization across the cosmos.&#x20;

We have to be able to gaze at the stars, and imagine machines-- one day -- carrying us across those vast distances between galaxies. These machines will be our only insurance, perhaps allowing at the very least some essence of humanity--knowledge, culture, and maybe even consciousness itself--surviving in the face of the ultimate fate of the universe. It is a vision that challenges and inspires us to go beyond what we believe to be possible.

### The Fact of Dependent Isolation

With that said, our survival hangs only by the one thread of our memetic infrastructure. Without a constant and concerted effort to bolster and grow our memetic repository, to _accelerate_ our communication, our energy, and our resource supply chains, our current population levels will prove unsustainable. This is because the majority of our intelligence is now transferred physically; in other words, we have no "backup drive": if our memetic repository (i.e. the reservoir of our collective sociocultural knowledge) were to vanish, humanity would have to entirely rebuild its memetic repository from scratch. Such a scenario would prove a heavy challenge to overcome; for, what we've unflappably gifted ourselves over millennia in the way of _accelerating_ intelligences, _maximizing_ agencies and potentials, doing so has cost us in existential resilience. Consider the minimal resources that, say, a cow needs: nothing but a field of grass and water to embody its full potential. Humanity, on the other hand, in its decadent yet impressive creation of complex information systems and societal infrastructures, it has reduced, rather than increased, its ability to collectively weather true existential storms.

Our species' relationality to all living things, our self-aware part of the planetary web, plays an important role in our evolution, one fortunate (for us): If human intelligence were to reset (i.e. go extinct), the co-existing biological machines _could_ provide the framework for restarting the long evolution toward sophisticated organisms — e.g. humans. Crocodiles, for instance, have survived multiple mass extinctions, so we might do well to put them on retainer — should we go extinct — to reboot the pathway of evolution; we can be confident the crocodile would inadvertently facilitate the evolution of intelligent species again (Ross). The reason we must attend to the mantra, "**we can not reboot the crocodile**", is because humans cannot do this; they cannot reboot the evolutionary machine, of their own volition: We do not possess this same level of genetic resilience, at least not without accelerating our potential.&#x20;

More, no one is "out there" who is going to help us. While ACEL has accelerated past the antiquated worldview that humanity possesses some sort of latent, privileged protection from the universe's entropic forces, a critical mass of humans are still dangerously walking through life utterly naked, oblivious in their exposure to the absolute ambivalence within the unfolding cosmos. In doing so, they put at risk more than just themselves; they threaten their species' continued existence as well. For, with a catastrophic potentiality peeking over the horizon (to be treated in later chapters), we cannot afford to have any of our potential adaptive possibilities unavailable to us. Should we wish to survive any approach by the dark cloud of indifference, humanity must gather and have at its disposal quite literally _all_ of its resources.&#x20;

This is an imperative: If we want to live, we must quickly and collectively agree as a species that, beyond any reasonable doubt, the molecular structure of the cosmos does not care if we live or die; it does not differentiate between a human being and a tardigrade, or a leaf, or one of Saturn's rings. Even famed astronomer Carl Sagan took note of this in _Cosmos_, saying, "The universe seems neither benign nor hostile, merely indifferent to the concerns of such puny creatures as we" (250). While some of our species do despairingly confront this fact, their woe is not so dangerous as those who stubbornly refuse to accept that no succor has been, is, or will ever be provided from anywhere _out-there._ In fact, as the entirety of our repository tells us, the _only_ thing that advocates for us is _our own selves._&#x20;

While we cannot know if early humans acknowledged the universe's silent and ever-threatening ambivalence to _life_, they do appear to have abided in some sense the callous nature of material existence. We hazard this assumption because we are, in fact, _here_, meaning humanity has won its battles thus far.&#x20;

Truly, all current living things carry in their line victorious predecessors, those past champions who've confronted, and successfully dealt with, the silence of cosmic disregard. From each of their confrontations was captured and stored in respective repositories almost sacred forms of survival knowledge, which have helped the perpetuation of life all the way to the arrival of us and all that is here now. It is this memetic flow triumphant, this unstopped regifting to ourselves intelligences that bring these words to you now.&#x20;

But these forms in our memetic arsenal of survival may not be enough for what we are to face next.
